THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO 
AN EXPERIMENT IN LITERARY INVESTIGATION
SOLZHENITSYN

(BOOK 1 OF 3)

I dedicate this
to all those who did not live

to tell it.
And may they please forgive me

for not having seen it all

nor remembered it all,

for not having divined all of it.

Author's Note

For years I have with reluctant heart withheld from publication this already completed book: my
obligation to those still living outweighed my obligation to the dead. But now that State Security has
seized the book anyway, I have no alternative but to publish it immediately.

In this book there are no fictitious persons, nor fictitious events. People and places are named with
their own names. If they are identified by initials instead of names, it is for personal considerations.
If they are not named at all, it is only because human memory has failed to preserve their names. But
it all took place just as it is here described.

Contents

Preface

PARTI

The Prison Industry

"In the period of dictatorship, surrounded on all sides by enemies, we sometimes manifested
unnecessary leniency and unnecessary softheartedness."

KRYLENKO,

speech at the Promparty trial

1. Arrest

2. The History of Our Sewage Disposal System

3. The Interrogation

4. The Bluecaps

5. First Cell, First Love

6. That Spring

7. In the Engine Room

8. The Law as a Child

9. The Law Becomes a Man



10. The Law Matures

11. The Supreme Measure

12. Tyurzak



PART II

Perpetual Motion

And then we see it in the wheels,

the wheels!
Which never like to rest,

the wheels! . . .
How heavy are the stones themselves,

the millstones!
They dance in merry ranks . . .

the millstones!
W. MliLLER

1. The Ships of the Archipelago

2. The Ports of the Archipelago

3. The Slave Caravans

4. From Island to Island

Translator's Notes

Glossary:
Names

Institutions and Terms
ILLUSTRATIONS

Aleksandr Isayevich Solzhenitsyn In the army
In detention After his release from camp

Viktor Petrovich Pokrovsky
Aleksandr Shtrobinder
Vasily Ivanovich Anichkov
Aleksandr Andreyevich Svechin
Mikhail Aleksandrovich Reformatsky
Yelizaveta Yevgenyevna Anichkova

Preface

In 1949 some friends and I came upon a noteworthy news item in Nature, a magazine of the
Academy of Sciences. It reported in tiny type that in the course of excavations on the Kolyma River
a subterranean ice lens had been discovered which was actually a frozen stream — and in it were
found frozen specimens of prehistoric fauna some tens of thousands of years old. Whether fish or
salamander, these were preserved in so fresh a state, the scientific correspondent reported, that those
present immediately broke open the ice encasing the specimens and devoured them with relish on the
spot.

The magazine no doubt astonished its small audience with the news of how successfully the flesh of
fish could be kept fresh in a frozen state. But few, indeed, among its readers were able to decipher
the genuine and heroic meaning of this incautious report.



As for us, however — we understood instantly. We could picture the entire scene right down to the
smallest details: how those present broke up the ice in frenzied haste; how, flouting the higher claims
of ichthyology and elbowing each other to be first, they tore off chunks of the prehistoric flesh and
hauled them over to the bonfire to thaw them out and bolt them down.

We understood because we ourselves were the same kind of people as those present at that event.
We, too, were from that powerful tribe of zeks, unique on the face of the earth, the only people who
could devour prehistoric salamander with relish.

And the Kolyma was the greatest and most famous island, the pole of ferocity of that amazing
country of Gulag which, though scattered in an Archipelago geographically, was, in the
psychological sense, fused into a continent — an almost invisible, almost imperceptible country
inhabited by the zek people.

And this Archipelago crisscrossed and patterned that other country within which it was located, like
a gigantic patchwork, cutting into its cities, hovering over its streets. Yet there were many who did
not even guess at its presence and many, many others who had heard something vague. And only
those who had been there knew the whole truth.

But, as though stricken dumb on the islands of the Archipelago, they kept their silence.

By an unexpected turn of our history, a bit of the truth, an insignificant part of the whole, was
allowed out in the open. But those same hands which once screwed tight our handcuffs now hold out
their palms in reconciliation: "No, don't! Don't dig up the past! Dwell on the past and you'll lose an
eye."

But the proverb goes on to say: "Forget the past and you'll lose both eyes."

Decades go by, and the scars and sores of the past are healing over for good. In the course of this
period some of the islands of the Archipelago have shuddered and dissolved and the polar sea of
oblivion rolls over them. And someday in the future, this Archipelago, its air, and the bones of its
inhabitants, frozen in a lens of ice, will be discovered by our descendants like some improbable
salamander.

I would not be so bold as to try to write the history of the Archipelago. I have never had the chance
to read the documents. And, in fact, will anyone ever have the chance to read them? Those who do
not wish to recall have already had enough time — and will have more — to destroy all the documents,
down to the very last one.

I have absorbed into myself my own eleven years there not as something shameful nor as a
nightmare to be cursed: I have come almost to love that monstrous world, and now, by a happy turn
of events, I have also been entrusted with many recent reports and letters. So perhaps I shall be able
to give some account of the bones and flesh of that salamander — which, incidentally, is still alive.

This book could never have been created by one person alone. In addition to what I myself was able
to take away from the Archipelago — on the skin of my back, and with my eyes and ears — material
for this book was given me in reports, memoirs, and letters by 227 witnesses, whose names were to
have been listed here.

What I here express to them is not personal gratitude, because this is our common, collective
monument to all those who were tortured and murdered.

From among them I would like to single out in particular those who worked hard to help me obtain
supporting bibliographical material from books to be found in contemporary libraries or from books



long since removed from libraries and destroyed; great persistence was often required to find even
one copy which had been preserved. Even more would I like to pay tribute to those who helped me
keep this manuscript concealed in difficult periods and then to have it copied.

But the time has not yet come when I dare name them.

The old Solovetsky Islands prisoner Dmitri Petrovich Vitkovsky was to have been editor of this
book. But his half a lifetime spent there — indeed, his own camp memoirs are entitled "Half a
Lifetime" — resulted in untimely paralysis, and it was not until after he had already been deprived of
the gift of speech that he was able to read several completed chapters only and see for himself that
everything will be told.

And if freedom still does not dawn on my country for a long time to come, then the very reading and
handing on of this book will be very dangerous, so that I am bound to salute future readers as well —
on behalf of those who have perished.

When I began to write this book in 1958, 1 knew of no memoirs nor works of literature dealing with
the camps. During my years of work before 1967 I gradually became acquainted with the Kolyma
Stories of Varlam Shalamov and the memoirs of Dmitri Vitkovsky, Y. Ginzburg, and O. Adamova-
Sliozberg, to which I refer in the course of my narrative as literary facts known to all (as indeed they
someday shall be).

Despite their intent and against their will, certain persons provided invaluable material for this book
and helped preserve many important facts and statistics as well as the very air they breathed: M. I.
Sudrabs-Latsis, N. V. Krylenko, the Chief State Prosecutor for many years, his heir A. Y.
Vyshinsky, and those jurists who were his accomplices, among whom one must single out in
particular I. L. Averbakh.

Material for this book was also provided by thirty-six Soviet writers, headed by Maxim Gorky,
authors of the disgraceful book on the White Sea Canal, which was the first in Russian literature to
glorify slave labor.



Chapter 1
Arrest



How do people get to this clandestine Archipelago? Hour by hour planes fly there, ships steer their
course there, and trains thunder off to it — but all with nary a mark on them to tell of their destination.
And at ticket windows or at travel bureaus for Soviet or foreign tourists the employees would be
astounded if you were to ask for a ticket to go there. They know nothing and they've never heard of



the Archipelago as a whole or of any one of its innumerable islands.

Those who go to the Archipelago to administer it get there via the training schools of the Ministry of
Internal Affairs.

Those who go there to be guards are conscripted via the military conscription centers.

And those who, like you and me, dear reader, go there to die, must get there solely and compulsorily
via arrest.

Arrest! Need it be said that it is a breaking point in your life, a bolt of lightning which has scored a
direct hit on you? That it is an unassimilable spiritual earthquake not every person can cope with, as
a result of which people often slip into insanity?

The Universe has as many different centers as there are living beings in it. Each of us is a center of
the Universe, and that Universe is shattered when they hiss at you: "You are under arrest. "

If you are arrested, can anything else remain unshattered by this cataclysm?

But the darkened mind is incapable of embracing these displacements in our universe, and both the
most sophisticated and the veriest simpleton among us, drawing on all life's experience, can gasp out
only: "Me? What for?"

And this is a question which, though repeated millions and millions of times before, has yet to
receive an answer.

Arrest is an instantaneous, shattering thrust, expulsion, somersault from one state into another.

We have been happily borne — or perhaps have unhappily dragged our weary way — down the long
and crooked streets of our lives, past all kinds of walls and fences made of rotting wood, rammed
earth, brick, concrete, iron railings. We have never given a thought to what lies behind them. We
have never tried to penetrate them with our vision or our understanding. But there is where the Gulag
country begins, right next to us, two yards away from us. In addition, we have failed to notice an
enormous number of closely fitted, well-disguised doors and gates in these fences. All those gates
were prepared for us, every last one! And all of a sudden the fateful gate swings quickly open, and
four white male hands, unaccustomed to physical labor but nonetheless strong and tenacious, grab us
by the leg, arm, collar, cap, ear, and drag us in like a sack, and the gate behind us, the gate to our past
Ufe, is slammed shut once and for all.

That's all there is to it! You are arrested!

And you'll find nothing better to respond with than a lamblike bleat: "Me? What for?"

That's what arrest is: it's a blinding flash and a blow which shifts the present instantly into the past
and the impossible into omnipotent actuality.

That's all. And neither for the first hour nor for the first day will you be able to grasp anything else.

Except that in your desperation the fake circus moon will blink at you: "It's a mistake! They'll set
things right!"

And everything which is by now comprised in the traditional, even literary, image of an arrest will
pile up and take shape, not in your own disordered memory, but in what your family and your
neighbors in your apartment remember: The sharp night-time ring or the rude knock at the door. The



insolent entrance of the unwiped jackboots of the unsleeping State Security operatives. The
frightened and cowed civilian witness at their backs. (And what function does this civilian witness
serve? The victim doesn't even dare think about it and the operatives don't remember, but that's what
the regulations call for, and so he has to sit there all night long and sign in the morning.

[The regulation, purposeless in itself, derives, N.M. recalls, from that strange time when the citizenry
not only was supposed to but actually dared to verify the actions of the police.]

For the witness, jerked from his bed, it is torture too — to go out night after night to help arrest his
own neighbors and acquaintances.)

The traditional image of arrest is also trembling hands packing for the victim — a change of
underwear, a piece of soap, something to eat; and no one knows what is needed, what is permitted,
what clothes are best to wear; and the Security agents keep interrupting and hurrying you:

"You don't need anything. They'll feed you there. It's warm there." (It's all lies. They keep hurrying
you to frighten you.)

The traditional image of arrest is also what happens afterward, when the poor victim has been taken
away. It is an alien, brutal, and crushing force totally dominating the apartment for hours on end, a
breaking, ripping open, pulling from the walls, emptying things from wardrobes and desks onto the
floor, shaking, dumping out, and ripping apart — piling up mountains of litter on the floor — and the
crunch of things being trampled beneath jackboots. And nothing is sacred in a search! During the
arrest of the locomotive engineer Inoshin, a tiny coffin stood in his room containing the body of his
newly dead child. The "jurists" dumped the child's body out of the coffin and searched it. They shake
sick people out of their sickbeds, and they unwind bandages to search beneath them.

[When in 1937 they wiped out Dr. Kazakov's institute, the "commission" broke up the jars
containing the ly sates developed by him, even though patients who had been cured and others still
being treated rushed around them, begging them to preserve the miraculous medicines. (According
to the official version, the lysates were supposed to be poisons; in that case, why should they not
have been kept as material evidence?)]

Nothing is so stupid as to be inadmissible during a search! For example, they seized from the
antiquarian Chetverukhin "a certain number of pages of Tsarist decrees" — to wit, the decree on
ending the war with Napoleon, on the formation of the Holy Alliance, and a proclamation of public
prayers against cholera during the epidemic of 1830. From our greatest expert on Tibet, Vostrikov,
they confiscated ancient Tibetan manuscripts of great value; and it took the pupils of the deceased
scholar thirty years to wrest them from the KGB ! When the Orientalist Nevsky was arrested, they
grabbed Tangut manuscripts — and twenty -five years later the deceased victim was posthumously
awarded a Lenin Prize for deciphering them. From Karger they took his archive of the Yenisei
Ostyaks and vetoed the alphabet and vocabulary he had developed for this people — and a small
nationality was thereby left without any written language. It would take a long time to describe all
this in educated speech, but there's a folk saying about the search which covers the subject: They are
looking for something which was never put there. They carry off whatever they have seized, but
sometimes they compel the arrested individual to carry it. Thus Nina Aleksandrovna Palchinskaya
hauled over her shoulder a bag filled with the papers and letters of her eternally busy and active
husband, the late great Russian engineer, carrying it into their maw — once and for all, forever.

For those left behind after the arrest there is the long tail end of a wrecked and devastated Ufe. And
the attempts to go and deliver food parcels. But from all the windows the answer comes in barking
voices: "Nobody here by that name!" "Never heard of him!" Yes, and in the worst days in Leningrad
it took five days of standing in crowded lines just to get to that window. And it may be only after
half a year or a year that the arrested person responds at all. Or else the answer is tossed out:



"Deprived of the right to correspond." And that means once and for all. "No right to
correspondence" — and that almost for certain means: "Has been shot."

[In other words, "We live in the cursed conditions in which a human being can disappear into the
void and even his closest relatives, his mother and his wife ... do not know for years what has
become of him." Is that right or not? That is what Lenin wrote in 1910 in his obituary of Babushkin.
But let's speak frankly: Babushkin was transporting arms for an uprising, and was caught with them
when he was shot. He knew what he was doing. You couldn't say that about helpless rabbits like us.]

That's how we picture arrest to ourselves.

The kind of night arrest described is, in fact, a favorite, because it has important advantages.
Everyone living in the apartment is thrown into a state of terror by the first knock at the door. The
arrested person is torn from the warmth of his bed. He is in a daze, half-asleep, helpless, and his
judgment is befogged. In a night arrest the State Security men have a superiority in numbers; there
are many of them, armed, against one person who hasn't even finished buttoning his trousers. During
the arrest and search it is highly improbable that a crowd of potential supporters will gather at the
entrance. The unhurried, step-by-step visits, first to one apartment, then to another, tomorrow to a
third and a fourth, provide an opportunity for the Security operations personnel to be deployed with
the maximum efficiency and to imprison many more citizens of a given town than the police force
itself numbers.

In addition, there's an advantage to night arrests in that neither the people in neighboring apartment
houses nor those on the city streets can see how many have been taken away. Arrests which frighten
the closest neighbors are no event at all to those farther away. It's as if they had not taken place.
Along that same asphalt ribbon on which the Black Marias scurry at night, a tribe of youngsters
strides by day with banners, flowers, and gay, untroubled songs.

But those who take, whose work consists solely of arrests, for whom the horror is boringly repetitive,
have a much broader understanding of how arrests operate. They operate according to a large body
of theory, and innocence must not lead one to ignore this. The science of arrest is an important
segment of the course on general penology and has been propped up with a substantial body of social
theory. Arrests are classified according to various criteria: nighttime and daytime; at home, at work,
during a journey; first-time arrests and repeats; individual and group arrests. Arrests are
distinguished by the degree of surprise required, the amount of resistance expected (even though in
tens of millions of cases no resistance was expected and in fact there was none). Arrests are also
differentiated by the thoroughness of the required search;by instructions either to make out or not to
make out an inventory of confiscated property or seal a room or apartment; to arrest the wife after
the husband and send the children to an orphanage, or to send the rest of the family into exile, or to
send the old folks to a labor camp too.

[And there is a separate Science of Searches too. I have had the chance to read a pamphlet on this
subject for correspondence-school law students in Alma-Ata. Its author praises highly those police
officials who in the course of their searches went so far as to turn over two tons of manure, eight
cubic yards of firewood, or two loads of hay; cleaned the snow from an entire collective-farm
vegetable plot, dismantled brick ovens, dug up cesspools, checked out toilet bowls, looked into
doghouses, chicken coops, birdhouses, tore apart mattresses, ripped adhesive tape off people's bodies
and even tore out metal teeth in the search for microfilm. Students were advised to begin and to end
with a body search (during the course of the search the arrested person might have grabbed up
something that had already been examined). They were also advised to return to the site of a search
at a different time of day and carry out the search all over again.]

No, no: arrests vary widely in form. In 1926 Irma Mendel, a Hungarian, obtained through the
Comintern two front-row tickets to the Bolshoi Theatre. Interrogator Klegel was courting her at the



time and she invited him to go with her. They sat through the show very affectionately, and when it
was over he took her — straight to the Lubyanka. And if on a flowering June day in 1927 on
Kuznetsky Most, the plump-cheeked, redheaded beauty Anna Skripnikova, who had just bought
some navy-blue material for a dress, climbed into a hansom cab with a young man-about-town, you
can be sure it wasn't a lovers' tryst at all, as the cabman understood very well and showed by his
frown (he knew the Organs don't pay). It was an arrest. In just a moment they would turn on the
Lubyanka and enter the black maw of the gates. And if, some twenty-two springs later. Navy
Captain Second Rank Boris Burkovsky, wearing a white tunic and a trace of expensive eau de
cologne, was buying a cake for a young lady, do not take an oath that the cake would ever reach the
young lady and not be sliced up instead by the knives of the men searching the captain and then
delivered to him in his first cell. No, one certainly cannot say that daylight arrest, arrest during a
journey, or arrest in the middle of a crowd has ever been neglected in our country. However, it has
always been clean-cut — and, most surprising of all, the victims, in cooperation with the Security
men, have conducted themselves in the noblest conceivable manner, so as to spare the living from
witnessing the death of the condemned.

Not everyone can be arrested at home, with a preliminary knock at the door (and if there is a knock,
then it has to be the house manager or else the postman). And not everyone can be arrested at work
either. If the person to be arrested is vicious, then it's better to seize him outside his ordinary
milieu — away from his family and colleagues, from those who share his views, from any hiding
places. It is essential that he have no chance to destroy, hide, or pass on anything to anyone. VIP's in
the military or the Party were sometimes first given new assignments, ensconced in a private railway
car, and then arrested en route. Some obscure, ordinary mortal, scared to death by epidemic arrests
all around him and already depressed for a week by sinister glances from his chief, is suddenly
summoned to the local Party committee, where he is beamingly presented with a vacation ticket to a
Sochi sanatorium. The rabbit is overwhelmed and immediately concludes that his fears were
groundless. After expressing his gratitude, he hurries home, triumphant, to pack his suitcase. It is
only two hours till train time, and he scolds his wife for being too slow. He arrives at the station with
time to spare. And there in the waiting room or at the bar he is hailed by an extraordinarily pleasant
young man: "Don't you remember me, Pyotr Ivanich?" Pyotr Ivanich has difficulty remembering:
"Well, not exactly, you see, although ..." The young man, however, is overflowing with friendly
concern: "Come now, how can that be? I'll have to remind you. ..." And he bows respectfully to
Pyotr Ivanich's wife: "You must forgive us. I'll keep him only one minute." The wife accedes, and
trustingly the husband lets himself be led away by the arm — forever or for ten years!

The station is thronged — and no one notices anything. . . . Oh, you citizens who love to travel! Do
not forget that in every station there are a GPU Branch and several prison cells.

This importunity of alleged acquaintances is so abrupt that only a person who has not had the
wolfish preparation of camp life is likely to pull back from it. Do not suppose, for example, that if
you are an employee of the American Embassy by the name of Alexander D. you cannot be arrested
in broad daylight on Gorky Street, right by the Central Telegraph Office. Your unfamiliar friend
dashes through the press of the crowd, and opens his plundering arms to embrace you: "Saaasha!" He
simply shouts at you, with no effort to be inconspicuous. "Hey, pal! Long time no see! Come on
over, let's get out of the way." At that moment a Pobeda sedan draws up to the curb. . . . And several
days later TASS will issue an angry statement to all the papers alleging that informed circles of the
Soviet government have no information on the disappearance of Alexander D. But what's so unusual
about that? Our boys have carried out such arrests in Brussels — which was where Zhora Blednov
was seized — not just in Moscow.

One has to give the Organs their due: in an age when public speeches, the plays in our theaters, and
women's fashions all seem to have come off assembly lines, arrests can be of the most varied kind.
They take you aside in a factory corridor after you have had your pass checked — and you're arrested.
They take you from a military hospital with a temperature of 102, as they did with Ans Bemshtein,



and the doctor will not raise a peep about your arrest — just let him try! They'll take you right off the
operating table — as they took N. M. Vorobyev, a school inspector, in 1936, in the middle of an
operation for stomach ulcer — and drag you off to a cell, as they did him, half-alive and all bloody (as
Karpunich recollects). Or, like Nadya Levitskaya, you try to get information about your mother's
sentence, and they give it to you, but it turns out to be a confrontation — and your own arrest! In the
Gastronome — the fancy food store — you are invited to the special-order department and arrested
there. You are arrested by a religious pilgrim whom you have put up for the night "for the sake of
Christ." You are arrested by a meterman who has come to read your electric meter. You are arrested
by a bicyclist who has run into you on the street, by a railway conductor, a taxi driver, a savings
bank teller, the manager of a movie theater. Any one of them can arrest you, and you notice the
concealed maroon-colored identification card only when it is too late.

Sometimes arrests even seem to be a game — there is so much superfluous imagination, so much
well-fed energy, invested in them. After all, the victim would not resist anyway. Is it that the
Security agents want to justify their employment and their numbers? After all, it would seem enough
to send notices to all the rabbits marked for arrest, and they would show up obediently at the
designated hour and minute at the iron gates of State Security with a bundle in their hands — ready to
occupy a piece of floor in the cell for which they were intended. And, in fact, that's the way
collective fanners are arrested. Who wants to go all the way to a hut at night, with no roads to travel
on? They are summoned to the village soviet — and arrested there. Manual workers are called into
the office.

Of course, every machine has a point at which it is overloaded, beyond which it cannot function. In
the strained and overloaded years of 1945 and 1946, when trainload after trainload poured in from
Europe, to be swallowed up immediately and sent off to Gulag, all that excessive theatricality went
out the window, and the whole theory suffered greatly. All the fuss and feathers of ritual went flying
in every direction, and the arrest of tens of thousands took on the appearance of a squalid roll call:
they stood there with lists, read off the names of those on one train, loaded them onto another, and
that was the whole arrest.

For several decades political arrests were distinguished in our country precisely by the fact that
people were arrested who were guilty of nothing and were therefore unprepared to put up any
resistance whatsoever. There was a general feeling of being destined for destruction, a sense of
having nowhere to escape from the GPU-NKVD (which, incidentally, given our internal passport
system, was quite accurate). And even in the fever of epidemic arrests, when people leaving for work
said farewell to their families every day, because they could not be certain they would return at
night, even then almost no one tried to run away and only in rare cases did people commit suicide.
And that was exactly what was required. A submissive sheep is a find for a wolf.

This submissiveness was also due to ignorance of the mechanics of epidemic arrests. By and large,
the Organs had no profound reasons for their choice of whom to arrest and whom not to arrest. They
merely had over-all assignments, quotas for a specific number of arrests. These quotas might be
filled on an orderly basis or wholly arbitrarily. In 1937 a woman came to the reception room of the
Novocherkassk NKVD to ask what she should do about the unfed unweaned infant of a neighbor
who had been arrested. They said: "Sit down, we'll find out." She sat there for two hours —
whereupon they took her and tossed her into a cell. They had a total plan which had to be fulfilled in
a hurry, and there was no one available to send out into the city — and here was this woman already
in their hands!

On the other hand, the NKVD did come to get the Latvian Andrei Pavel near Orsha. But he didn't
open the door; he jumped out the window, escaped, and shot straight to Siberia. And even though he

lived under his own name, and it was clear from his documents that he had come from Orsha, he was
never arrested, nor summoned to the Organs, nor subjected to any suspicion whatsoever. After all,
search for wanted persons falls into three categories: Ail-Union, republican, and provincial. And the



pursuit of nearly half of those arrested in those epidemics would have been confined to the
provinces. A person marked for arrest by virtue of chance circumstances, such as a neighbor's
denunciation, could be easily replaced by another neighbor. Others, like Andrei Pavel, who found
themselves in a trap or an ambushed apartment by accident, and who were bold enough to escape
immediately, before they could be questioned, were never caught and never charged; while those
who stayed behind to await justice got a term in prison. And the overwhelming majority — almost
all — behaved just like that: without any spirit, helplessly, with a sense of doom.

It is true, of course, that the NKVD, in the absence of the person it wanted, would make his relatives
guarantee not to leave the area. And, of course, it was easy enough to cook up a case against those
who stayed behind to replace the one who had fled.

Universal innocence also gave rise to the universal failure to act. Maybe they won't take you? Maybe
it will all blow over? A. I. Ladyzhensky was the chief teacher in a school in remote Kologriv. In
1937 a peasant approached him in an open market and passed him a message from a third person:
"Aleksandr Ivanich, get out of town, you are on the list!" But he stayed: After all, the whole school
rests on my shoulders, and their own children are pupils here. How can they arrest me? (Several days
later he was arrested.) Not everyone was so fortunate as to understand at the age of fourteen, as did
Vanya Levitsky: "Every honest man is sure to go to prison. Right now my papa is serving time, and
when I grow up they'll put me in too." (They put him in when he was twenty -three years old.) The
majority sit quietly and dare to hope. Since you aren't guilty, then how can they arrest you? It's a
mistake! They are already dragging you along by the collar, and you still keep on exclaiming to
yourself: "It's a mistake! They'll set things straight and let me out!" Others are being arrested en
masse, and that's a bothersome fact, but in those other cases there is always some dark area: "Maybe
he was guilty . . . ?" But as for you, you are obviously innocent! You still believe that the Organs are
humanly logical institutions: they will set things straight and let you out.

Why, then, should you run away? And how can you resist right then? After all, you'll only make
your situation worse; you'll make it more difficult for them to sort out the mistake. And it isn't just
that you don't put up any resistance; you even walk down the stairs on tiptoe, as you are ordered to
do, so your neighbors won't hear.

[And how we burned in the camps later, thinking: What would things have been like if every
Security operative, when he went out at night to make an arrest, had been uncertain whether he
would return alive and had to say good-bye to his family? Or if, during periods of mass arrests, as for
example in Leningrad, when they arrested a quarter of the entire city, people had not simply sat there
in their lairs, paling with terror at every bang of the downstairs door and at every step on the
staircase, but had understood they had nothing left to lose and had boldly set up in the downstairs
hall an ambush of half a dozen people with axes, hammers, pokers, or whatever else was at hand?
After all, you knew ahead of time that those bluecaps were out at night for no good purpose. And
you could be sure ahead of time that you'd be cracking the skull of a cutthroat. Or what about the
Black Maria sitting out there on the street with one lonely chauffeur — what if it had been driven off
or its tires spiked? The Organs would very quickly have suffered a shortage of officers and transport
and, notwithstanding all of Stalin's thirst, the cursed machine would have ground to a halt!

If ... if ... We didn't love freedom enough. And even more — we had no awareness of the real
situation. We spent ourselves in one unrestrained outburst in 1917, and then we hurried io submit.
We submitted with pleasure! (Arthur Ransome describes a workers' meeting in Yaroslavl in 1921.
Delegates were sent to the workers from the Central Committee in Moscow to confer on the
substance of the argument about trade unions. The representative of the opposition, Y. Larin,
explained to the workers that their trade union must be their defense against the administration, that
they possessed rights which they had won and upon which no one else had any right to infringe. The
workers, however, were completely indifferent, simply not comprehending whom they still needed
to be defended against and why they still needed any rights. When the spokesman for the Party line



rebuked them for their laziness and for getting out of hand, and demanded sacrifices from them —
overtime work without pay, reductions in food, military discipline in the factory administration — this
aroused great elation and applause.) We purely and simply deserved everything that happened
afterward.]

At what exact point, then, should one resist? When one's belt is taken away? When one is ordered to
face into a corner? When one crosses the threshold of one's home? An arrest consists of a series of
incidental irrelevancies, of a multitude of things that do not matter, and there seems no point in
arguing about any one of them individually — especially at a time when the thoughts of the person
arrested are wrapped tightly about the big question: "What for?" — and yet all these incidental
irrelevancies taken together implacably constitute the arrest.

Almost anything can occupy the thoughts of a person who has just been arrested! This alone would
fill volumes. There can be feelings which we never suspected. When nineteen-year-old Yevgeniya
Doyarenko was arrested in 1921 and three young Chekists were poking about her bed and through
the underwear in her chest of drawers, she was not disturbed. There was nothing there, and they
would find nothing. But all of a sudden they touched her personal diary, which she would not have
shown even to her own mother. And these hostile young strangers reading the words she had written
was more devastating to her than the whole Lubyanka with its bars and its cellars. It is true of many
that the outrage inflicted by arrest on their personal feelings and attachments can be far, far stronger
than their political beliefs or their fear of prison. A person who is not inwardly prepared for the use
of violence against him is always weaker than the person committing the violence.

There are a few bright and daring individuals who understand instantly. Grigoryev, the Director of
the Geological Institute of the Academy of Sciences, barricaded himself inside and spent two hours
burning up his papers when they came to arrest him in 1948.

Sometimes the principal emotion of the person arrested is relief and even happiness! This is another

aspect of human nature. It happened before the Revolution too: the Yekaterinodar schoolteacher
Serdyukova, involved in the case of Aleksandr Ulyanov, felt only relief when she was arrested. But
this feeling was a thousand times stronger during epidemics of arrests when all around you they were
hauling in people like yourself and still had not come for you; for some reason they were taking their
time. After all, that kind of exhaustion, that kind of suffering, is worse than any kind of arrest, and
not only for a person of limited courage. Vasily Vlasov, a fearless Communist, whom we shall recall
more than once later on, renounced the idea of escape proposed by his non-Party assistants, and
pined away because the entire leadership of the Kady District was arrested in 1937, and they kept
delaying and delaying his own arrest. He could only endure the blow head on. He did endure it, and
then he relaxed, and during the first days after his arrest he felt marvelous. In 1934 the priest Father
Irakly went to Alma-Ata to visit some believers in exile there. During his absence they came three
times to his Moscow apartment to arrest him. When he returned, members of his flock met him at the
station and refused to let him go home, and for eight years hid him in one apartment after another.
The priest suffered so painfully from this harried life that when he was finally arrested in 1942 he
sang hymns of praise to God.

In this chapter we are speaking only of the masses, the helpless rabbits arrested for no one knows
what reason. But in this book we will also have to touch on those who in postrevolutionary times
remained genuinely political. Vera Rybakova, a Social Democratic student, dreamed when she was
in freedom of being in the detention center in Suzdal. Only there did she hope to encounter her old
comrades — for there were none of them left in freedom. And only there could she work out her
world outlook. The Socialist Revolutionary — the SR — Yekaterina Olitskaya didn't consider herself
worthy of being imprisoned in 1924. After all, Russia's best people had served time and she was still
young and had not yet done anything for Russia. But freedom itself was expelling her. And so both
of them went to prison — with pride and happiness.



"Resistance! Why didn't you resist?" Today those who have continued to live on in comfort scold
those who suffered.

Yes, resistance should have begun right there, at the moment of the arrest itself.
But it did not begin.

And so they are leading you. During a daylight arrest there is always that brief and unique moment
when they are leading you, either inconspicuously, on the basis of a cowardly deal you have made,
or else quite openly, their pistols unholstered, through a crowd of hundreds of just such doomed
innocents as yourself. You aren't gagged. You really can and you really ought to cry out — to cry out
that you are being arrested! That villains in disguise are trapping people! That arrests are being made
on the strength of false denunciations! That millions are being subjected to silent reprisals! If many
such outcries had been heard all over the city in the course of a day, would not our fellow citizens
perhaps have begun to bristle? And would arrests perhaps no longer have been so easy?

In 1927, when submissiveness had not yet softened our brains to such a degree, two Chekists tried to
arrest a woman on Serpukhov Square during the day. She grabbed hold of the stanchion of a
streetlamp and began to scream, refusing to submit. A crowd gathered. (There had to have been that
kind of woman; there had to have been that kind of crowd too! Passers-by didn't all just close their
eyes and hurry by!) The quick young men immediately became flustered. They can't work in the
public eye. They got into their car and fled. (Right then and there she should have gone to a railroad
station and left! But she went home to spend the night. And during the night they took her off to the
Lubyanka.)

Instead, not one sound comes from your parched lips, and that passing crowd naively believes that
you and your executioners are friends out for a stroll.

I myself often had the chance to cry out.

On the eleventh day after my arrest, three SMERSH bums, more burdened by four suitcases full of
war booty than by me (they had come to rely on me in the course of the long trip), brought me to the
Byelorussian Station in Moscow. They were called a Special Convoy — in other words, a special
escort guard — but in actual fact their automatic pistols only interfered with their dragging along the
four terribly heavy bags of loot they and their chiefs in SMERSH counterintelligence on the Second
Byelorussian Front had plundered in Germany and were now bringing to their families in the
Fatherland under the pretext of convoying me. I myself lugged a fifth suitcase with no great joy since
it contained my diaries and literary works, which were being used as evidence against me.

Not one of the three knew the city, and it was up to me to pick the shortest route to the prison. I had
personally to conduct them to the Lubyanka, where they had never been before (and which, in fact, I
confused with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs).

I had spent one day in the counterintelligence prison at army headquarters and three days in the
counterintelligence prison at the headquarters of the front, where my cellmates had educated me in
the deceptions practiced by the interrogators, their threats and beatings; in the fact that once a person
was arrested he was never released; and in the inevitability of a tenner, a ten-year sentence; and then
by a miracle I had suddenly burst out of there and for four days had traveled like a free person
among /ree people, even though my flanks had already lain on rotten straw beside the latrine bucket,
my eyes had already beheld beaten-up and sleepless men, my ears had heard the truth, and my mouth
had tasted prison gruel. So why did I keep silent? Why, in my last minute out in the open, did I not
attempt to enlighten the hoodwinked crowd?

I kept silent, too, in the Polish city of Brodnica — but maybe they didn't understand Russian there. I



didn't call out one word on the streets of Bialystok — but maybe it wasn't a matter that concerned the
Poles. I didn't utter a sound at the Volkovysk Station — but there were very few people there. I
walked along the Minsk Station platform beside those same bandits as if nothing at all were amiss —
but the station was still a ruin. And now I was leading the SMERSH men through the circular upper
concourse of the Byelorussian-Radial subway station on the Moscow circle line, with its white-
ceilinged dome and brilliant electric lights, and opposite us two parallel escalators, thickly packed
with Muscovites, rising from below. It seemed as though they were all looking at me! They kept
coming in an endless ribbon from down there, from the depths of ignorance — on and on beneath the
gleaming dome, reaching toward me for at least one word of truth — so why did I keep silent?

Every man always has handy a dozen glib little reasons why he is right not to sacrifice himself.

Some still have hopes of a favorable outcome to their case and are afraid to ruin their chances by an
outcry. (For, after all, we get no news from that other world, and we do not realize that from the very
moment of arrest our fate has almost certainly been decided in the worst possible sense and that we
cannot make it any worse.) Others have not yet attained the mature concepts on which a shout of
protest to the crowd must be based. Indeed, only a revolutionary has slogans on his lips that are
crying to be uttered aloud; and where would the uninvolved, peaceable average man come by such
slogans? He simply does not know what to shout. And then, last of all, there is the person whose
heart is too full of emotion, whose eyes have seen too much, for that whole ocean to pour forth in a
few disconnected cries.

As for me, I kept silent for one further reason: because those Muscovites thronging the steps of the
escalators were too few for me, too few! Here my cry would be heard by 200 or twice 200, but what
about the 200 million? Vaguely, unclearly, I had a vision that someday I would cry out to the 200
million.

But for the time being I did not open my mouth, and the escalator dragged me implacably down into
the nether world.

And when I got to Okhotny Ryad, I continued to keep silent. Nor did I utter a cry at the Metropole
Hotel.

Nor wave my arms on the Golgotha of Lubyanka Square.

Mine was, probably, the easiest imaginable kind of arrest. It did not tear me from the embrace of kith
and kin, nor wrench me from a deeply cherished home life. One pallid European February it took me
from our narrow salient on the Baltic Sea, where, depending on one's point of view, either we had
surrounded the Germans or they had surrounded us, and it deprived me only of my familiar artillery
battery and the scenes of the last three months of the war.

The brigade commander called me to his headquarters and asked me for my pistol; I turned it over
without suspecting any evil intent, when suddenly, from a tense, immobile suite of staff officers in
the comer, two counterintelligence officers stepped forward hurriedly, crossed the room in a few
quick bounds, their four hands grabbed simultaneously at the star on my cap, my shoulder boards,
my officer's belt, my map case, and they shouted theatrically:

"You are under arrest!"

Burning and prickling from head to toe, all I could exclaim was:
"Me? What for?"

And even though there is usually no answer to this question, surprisingly I received one! This is



worth recalling, because it is so contrary to our usual custom. Hardly had the SMERSH men finished
"plucking" me and taken my notes on political subjects, along with my map case, and begun to push
me as quickly as possible toward the exit, urged on by the German shellfire rattling the
windowpanes, than I heard myself firmly addressed — yes! Across the sheer gap separating me from
those left behind, the gap created by the heavy-falling word "arrest," across that quarantine line not
even a sound dared penetrate, came the unthinkable, magic words of the brigade commander:

"Solzhenitsyn. Come back here."

With a sharp turn I broke away from the hands of the SMERSH men and stepped back to the brigade
commander. I had never known him very well. He had never condescended to run-of-the-mill
conversations with me. To me his face had always conveyed an order, a command, wrath. But right
now it was illuminated in a thoughtful way. Was it from shame for his own involuntary part in this
dirty business? Was it from an impulse to rise above the pitiful subordination of a whole lifetime?
Ten days before, I had led my own reconnaissance battery almost intact out of the fire pocket in
which the twelve heavy guns of his artillery battalion had been left, and now he had to renounce me
because of a piece of paper with a seal on it?

"You have . . ."he asked weightily, "a friend on the First Ukrainian Front?"

"It's forbidden! You have no right!" the captain and the major of counterintelligence shouted at the
colonel. In the corner, the suite of staff officers crowded closer to each other in fright, as if they
feared to share the brigade commander's unbelievable rashness (the political officers among them
already preparing to present materials against him). But I had already understood: I knew instantly I
had been arrested because of my correspondence with a school friend, and understood from what
direction to expect danger.

Zakhar Georgiyevich Travkin could have stopped right there! But no! Continuing his attempt to
expunge his part in this and to stand erect before his own conscience, he rose from behind his desk —
he had never stood up in my presence in my former life — and reached across the quarantine line that
separated us and gave me his hand, although he would never have reached out his hand to me had I
remained a free man. And pressing my hand, while his whole suite stood there in mute horror,
showing that warmth that may appear in an habitually severe face, he said fearlessly and precisely:

"I wish you happiness. Captain!"

Not only was I no longer a captain, but I had been exposed as an enemy of the people (for among us
every person is totally exposed from the moment of arrest). And he had wished happiness — to an
enemy?

[ Here is what is most surprising of all: one can be a human being despite everything! Nothing
happened to Travkin. Not long ago, we met again cordially, and I really got to know him for the first
time. He is a retired general and an inspector of the Hunters' Alliance.]

The panes rattled. The German shells tore up the earth two hundred yards away, reminding one that
this could not have happened back in the rear, under the ordinary circumstances of established
existence, but only out here, under the breath of death, which was not only close by but in the face of
which all were equal.

This is not going to be a volume of memoirs about my own life. Therefore I am not going to recount
the truly amusing details of my arrest, which was like no other. That night the SMERSH officers
gave up their last hope of being able to make out where we were on the map — they never had been
able to read maps anyway. So they politely handed the map to me and asked me to tell the driver
how to proceed to counterintelligence at army headquarters. I, therefore, led them and myself to that



prison, and in gratitude they immediately put me not in an ordinary cell but in a punishment cell.
And I really must describe that closet in a German peasant house which served as a temporary
punishment cell.

It was the length of one human body and wide enough for three to lie packed tightly, four at a pinch.
As it happened, I was the fourth, shoved in after midnight. The three lying there blinked sleepily at
me in the light of the smoky kerosene lantern and moved over, giving me enough space to lie on my
side, half between them, half on top of them, until gradually, by sheer weight, I could wedge my way
in. And so four overcoats lay on the crushed-straw-covered floor, with eight boots pointing at the
door. They slept and I burned. The more self-assured I had been as a captain half a day before, the
more painful it was to crowd onto the floor of that closet. Once or twice the other fellows woke up
numb on one side, and we all turned over at the same time.

Toward morning they awoke, yawned, grunted, pulled up their legs, moved into various comers, and
our acquaintance began.

"What are you in for?"

But a troubled little breeze of caution had already breathed on me beneath the poisoned roof of
SMERSH and I pretended to be surprised:

"No idea. Do the bastards tell you?"

However, my cellmates — tankmen in soft black helmets — hid nothing. They were three honest,
openhearted soldiers — people of a kind I had become attached to during the war years because I
myself was more complex and worse. All three had been officers. Their shoulder boards also had
been viciously torn off, and in some places the cotton batting stuck out. On their stained field shirts
Ught patches indicated where decorations had been removed, and there were dark and red scars on
their faces and arms, the results of wounds and burns. Their tank unit had, unfortunately, arrived for
repairs in the village where the SMERSH counterintelligence headquarters of the Forty-eighth Army
was located. Still damp from the battle of the day before, yesterday they had gotten drunk, and on the
outskirts of the village broke into a bath where they had noticed two raunchy broads going to bathe.
The girls, half-dressed, managed to get away all right from the soldiers' staggering, drunken legs. But
one of them, it turned out, was the property of the army Chief of CounterintelUgence, no less.

Yes! For three weeks the war had been going on inside Germany, and all of us knew very well that if
the girls were German they could be raped and then shot. This was almost a combat distinction. Had
they been Polish girls or our own displaced Russian girls, they could have been chased naked around
the garden and slapped on the behind — an amusement, no more. But just because this one was the
"campaign wife" of the Chief of Counterintelligence, right off some deep-in-the-rear sergeant had
viciously torn from three front-line officers the shoulder boards awarded them by the front
headquarters and had taken off the decorations conferred upon them by the Presidium of the
Supreme Soviet. And now these warriors, who had gone through the whole war and who had no
doubt crushed more than one line of enemy trenches, were waiting for a court-martial, whose
members, had it not been for their tank, could have come nowhere near the village.

We put out the kerosene lamp, which had already used up all the air there was to breathe. A Judas
hole the size of a postage stamp had been cut in the door and through it came indirect light from the
corridor. Then, as if afraid that with the coming of daylight we would have too much room in the
punishment cell, they tossed in a fifth person. He stepped in wearing a newish Red Army tunic and a
cap that was also new, and when he stopped opposite the peephole we could see a fresh face with a
tumed-up nose and red cheeks.

"Where are you from, brother? Who are you?"



"From the other side," he answered briskly. "A shhpy."

"You're kidding!" We were astounded. (To be a spy and to admit it — Sheinin and the brothers Tur
had never written that kind of spy story!)

"What is there to kid about in wartime?" the young fellow sighed reasonably. "And just how else can
you get back home from being a POW? Well, you tell me!"

He had barely begun to tell us how, some days back, the Germans had led him through the front lines
so that he could play the spy and blow up bridges, whereupon he had gone immediately to the
nearest battalion headquarters to turn himself in; but the weary, sleep-starved battalion commander
hadn't believed his story about being a spy and had sent him off to the nurse to get a pill. And at that
moment new impressions burst upon us:

"Out for toilet call! Hands behind your backs!" hollered a master sergeant hardhead as the door
sprang open; he was just built for swinging the tail of a 122-millimeter cannon.

A circle of machine gunners had been strung around the peasant courtyard, guarding the path which
was pointed out to us and which went behind the bam. I was bursting with indignation that some
ignoramus of a master sergeant dared to give orders to us officers: "Hands behind your backs!" But
the tank officers put their hands behind them and I followed suit.

Back of the barn was a small square area in which the snow had been all trampled down but had not
yet melted. It was soiled all over with human feces, so densely scattered over the whole square that it
was difficult to find a spot to place one's two feet and squat. However, we spread ourselves about
and the five of us did squat down. Two machine gunners grimly pointed their machine pistols at us
as we squatted, and before a minute had passed the master sergeant brusquely urged us on:

"Come on, hurry it up! With us they do it quickly!"

Not far from me squatted one of the tankmen, a native of Rostov, a tall, melancholy senior
lieutenant. His face was blackened by a thin film of metallic dust or smoke, but the big red scar
stretching across his cheek stood out nonetheless.

"What do you mean, with us? " he asked quietly, indicating no intention of hurrying back to the
punishment cell that still stank of kerosene.

"In SMERSH counterintelligence!" the master sergeant shot back proudly and more resonantly than
was called for. (The counterintelligence men used to love that tastelessly concocted word
"SMERSH," manufactured from the initial syllables of the words for "death to spies." They felt it
intimidated people.)

"And with us we do it slowly," replied the senior lieutenant thoughtfully. His helmet was pulled
back, uncovering his still untrimmed hair. His oaken, battle-hardened rear end was lifted toward the
pleasant cooUsh breeze.

"Where do you mean, with us? " the master sergeant barked at him more loudly than he needed to.

"In the Red Army," the senior lieutenant replied very quietly from his heels, measuring with his look
the cannon-tailer that never was.

Such were my first gulps of prison air.



Chapter 2

The History of Our Sewage Disposal System



When people today decry the abuses of the cult, they keep getting hung up on those years which are
stuck in our throats, '37 and '38. And memory begins to make it seem as though arrests were never
made before or after, but only in those two years.

Although I have no statistics at hand, I am not afraid of erring when I say that the wave of 1937 and
1938 was neither the only one nor even the main one, but only one, perhaps, of the three biggest
waves which strained the murky, stinking pipes of our prison sewers to bursting.

Before it came the wave of 1929 and 1930, the size of a good River Ob, which drove a mere fifteen
million peasants, maybe even more, out into the taiga and the tundra. But peasants are a silent
people, without a literary voice, nor do they write complaints or memoirs. No interrogators sweated
out the night with them, nor did they bother to draw up formal indictments — it was enough to have a
decree from the village soviet. This wave poured forth, sank down into the permafrost, and even our
most active minds recall hardly a thing about it. It is as if it had not even scarred the Russian
conscience. And yet Stalin (and you and I as well) committed no crime more heinous than this.

And after it there was the wave of 1944 to 1946, the size of a good Yenisei, when they dumped
whole nations down the sewer pipes, not to mention millions and millions of others who (because of
us!) had been prisoners of war, or carried off to Germany and subsequently repatriated. (This was
Stalin's method of cauterizing the wounds so that scar tissue would form more quickly, and thus the
body politic as a whole would not have to rest up, catch its breath, regain its strength.) But in this
wave, too, the people were of the simpler kind, and they wrote no memoirs.

But the wave of 1937 swept up and carried off to the Archipelago people of position, people with a
Party past, yes, educated people, around whom were many who had been wounded and remained in
the cities . . . and what a lot of them had pen in hand! And today they are all writing, speaking,
remembering: "Nineteen thirty-seven!" A whole Volga of the people's grief!

But just say "Nineteen thirty-seven" to a Crimean Tatar, a Kalmyk, a Chechen, and he'll shrug his
shoulders. And what's 1937 to Leningrad when 1935 had come before it? And for the second-
termers (i.e., repeaters), or people from the Baltic countries — weren't 1948 and 1949 harder on
them? And if sticklers for style and geography should accuse me of having omitted some Russian
rivers, and of not yet having named some of the waves, then just give me enough paper! There were
enough waves to use up the names of all the rivers of Russia!

It is well known that any organ withers away if it is not used. Therefore, if we know that the Soviet
Security organs, or Organs (and they christened themselves with this vile word), praised and exalted
above all living things, have not died off even to the extent of one single tentacle, but, instead, have
grown new ones and strengthened their muscles — it is easy to deduce that they have had constant
exercise.

Through the sewer pipes the flow pulsed. Sometimes the pressure was higher than had been
projected, sometimes lower. But the prison sewers were never empty. The blood, the sweat, and the
urine into which we were pulped pulsed through them continuously. The history of this sewage
system is the history of an endless swallow and flow; flood alternating with ebb and ebb again with
flood; waves pouring in, some big, some small; brooks and rivulets flowing in from all sides; trickles
oozing in through gutters; and then just plain individually scooped-up droplets.

The chronological list which follows, in which waves made up of millions of arrested persons are
given equal attention with ordinary streamlets of unremarkable handfuls, is quite incomplete.



meager, miserly, and limited by my own capacity to penetrate the past. What is really needed is a
great deal of additional work by survivors famiUar with the material.

In compiling this list the most difficult thing is to begin, partly because the further back into the
decades one goes, the fewer the eyewitnesses who are left, and therefore the light of common
knowledge has gone out and darkness has set in, and the written chronicles either do not exist or are
kept under lock and key. Also, it is not entirely fair to consider in a single category the especially
brutal years of the Civil War and the first years of peacetime, when mercy might have been
expected.

But even before there was any Civil War, it could be seen that Russia, due to the makeup of its
population, was obviously not suited for any sort of socialism whatsoever. It was totally polluted.

One of the first blows of the dictatorship was directed against the Cadets — the members of the
Constitutional Democratic Party. (Under the Tsar they had constituted the most dangerous ranks of
revolution, and under the government of the proletariat they represented the most dangerous ranks of
reaction.) At the end of November, 1917, on the occasion of the first scheduled convening of the
Constituent Assembly, which did not take place, the Cadet Party was outlawed and arrests of its
members began. At about the same time, people associated with the "Alliance for the Constituent
Assembly" and the students enrolled in the "soldiers' universities" were being thrown in the jug.

Knowing the sense and spirit of the Revolution, it is easy to guess that during these months such
central prisons as Kresty in Petrograd and the Butyrki in Moscow, and many provincial prisons like
them, were filled with wealthy men, prominent public figures, generals and officers, as well as
officials of ministries and of the state apparatus who refused to carry out the orders of the new
authority. One of the first operations of the Cheka was to arrest the entire committee of the AU-
Russian Union of Employees.

One of the first circulars of the NKVD, in December, 1917, stated: "In view of sabotage by officials .
. . use maximum initiative in localities, not excluding confiscations, compulsion, and arrests."

[Vestnik NKVD (NKVD Herald), 1917, No. 1, p. 4.]

And even though V. I. Lenin, at the end of 1917, in order to establish "strictly revolutionary order,"
demanded "merciless suppression of attempts at anarchy on the part of drunkards, hooligans,
counterrevolutionaries, and other persons" — in other words, foresaw that drunkards and hooligans
represented the principal danger to the October Revolution, with counterrevolutionaries somewhere
back in third place — he nonetheless put the problem more broadly. In his essay "How to Organize
the Competition" (January 7 and 10, 1918), V. I. Lenin proclaimed the common, united purpose of
"purging the Russian land of all kinds of harmful insects." And under the term insects he included
not only all class enemies but also "workers malingering at their work" — for example, the typesetters
of the Petrograd Party printing shops. (That is what time does. It is difficult for us nowadays to
understand how workers who had just become dictators were immediately inclined to malinger at
work they were doing for themselves.) And then again: "In what block of a big city, in what factory,
in what village . . . are there not . . . saboteurs who call themselves intellectuals?" True, the forms of
insect-purging which Lenin conceived of in this essay were most varied: in some places they would
be placed under arrest, in other places set to cleaning latrines; in some, "after having served then-
time in punishment cells, they would be handed yellow tickets"; in others, parasites would be shot;
elsewhere you could take your pick of imprisonment "or punishment at forced labor of the hardest
kind." Even though he perceived and suggested the basic directions punishment should take,
Vladimir Ilyich proposed that "communes and communities" should compete to find the best
methods of purging.

It is not possible for us at this time fully to investigate exactly who fell within the broad definition of
insects; the population of Russia was too heterogeneous and encompassed small, special groups.



entirely superfluous and, today, forgotten. The people in the local zemstvo self-governing bodies in
the provinces were, of course, insects. People in the cooperative movement were also insects, as
were all owners of their own homes. There were not a few insects among the teachers in the
gymnasiums. The church parish councils were made up almost exclusively of insects, and it was
insects, of course, who sang in church choirs. All priests were insects — and monks and nuns even
more so. And all those Tolstoyans who, when they undertook to serve the Soviet government on, for
example, the railroads, refused to sign the required oath to defend the Soviet government with gun in
hand thereby showed themselves to be insects too. (We will later see some of them on trial.) The
railroads were particularly important, for there were indeed many insects hidden beneath railroad
uniforms, and they had to be rooted out and some of them slapped down. And telegraphers, for some
reason, were, for the most part, inveterate insects who had no sympathy for the Soviets. Nor could
you say a good word about Vikzhel, the All-Russian Executive Committee of the Union of Railroad
Workers, nor about the other trade unions, which were often filled with insects hostile to the working
class.

Just those groups we have so far enumerated represent an enormous number of people — several
years' worth of purge activity.

In addition, how many kinds of cursed intellectuals there were — restless students and a variety of
eccentrics, truth-seekers, and holy fools, of whom even Peter the Great had tried in vain to purge
Russia and who are always a hindrance to a well-ordered, strict regime.

It would have been impossible to carry out this hygienic purging, especially under wartime
conditions, if they had had to follow outdated legal processes and normal judicial procedures. And so
an entirely new form was adopted: extrajudicial reprisal, and this thankless job was self-
sacrificingly assumed by the Cheka, the Sentinel of the Revolution, which was the only punitive
organ in human history that combined in one set of hands investigation, arrest, interrogation,
prosecution, trial, and execution of the verdict.

In 1918, in order to speed up the cultural victory of the Revolution as well, they began to ransack the
churches and throw out the relics of saints, and to carry off church plate. Popular disorders broke out
in defense of the plundered churches and monasteries. Here and there the alarm bells rang out, and
the true Orthodox believers rushed forth, some of them with clubs. Naturally, some had to be
expended right on the spot and others arrested.

In considering now the period from 1918 to 1920, we are in difficulties: Should we classify among

the prison waves all those who were done in before they even got to prison cells? And in what
classification should we put those whom the Committees of the Poor took behind the wing of the
village soviet or to the rear of the courtyard, and finished Oj^ right there? Did the participants in the
clusters of plots uncovered in every province (two in Ryazan; one in Kostroma, Vyshni Volochek,
and Velizh; several in Kiev; several in Moscow; one in Saratov, Chernigov, Astrakhan, Seliger,
Smolensk, Bobruisk, the Tambov Cavalry, Chembar, Velikiye Luki, Mstislavl, etc.) at least succeed
in setting foot on the land of the Archipelago, or did they not — and are they therefore not related to
the subject of our investigations? Bypassing the repression of the now famous rebellions (Yaroslavl,
Murom, Rybinsk, Arzamas), we know of certain events only by their names — for instance, the
Kolpino executions of June, 1918. What were they? Who were they? And where should they be
classified?

There is also no little difficulty in deciding whether we should classify among the prison waves or on
the balance sheets of the Civil War those tens of thousands of hostages, i.e., people not personally
accused of anything, those peaceful citizens not even listed by name, who were taken off and
destroyed simply to terrorize or wreak vengeance on a military enemy or a re- bellious population.
After August 30, 1918, the NKVD ordered the localities "to arrest immediately all Right Socialist
Revolutionaries and to take a significant number of hostages from the bourgeoisie and military



officers."



[Vestnik NKVD, 1918, No. 21-22, p. 1.]

(This was just as if, for example, after the attempt of Aleksandr Ulyanov's group to assassinate the
Tsar, not only its members but all the students in Russia and a significant number ofzemstvo officials
had been arrested.) By a decree of the Defense Council of February 15, 1919 — apparently with
Lenin in the chair — the Cheka and the NKVD were ordered to take hostage peasants from those
localities where the removal of snow from railroad tracks "was not proceeding satisfactorily," and "if
the snow removal did not take place they were to be shot."

[Dekrety Sovetskoi Vlasti (Decrees of the Soviet Regime), Vol. 4, Moscow, 1968, p. 627.]

(At the end of 1920, by decree of the Council of People's Commissars, permission was given to take
Social Democrats as hostages too.)

But even restricting ourselves to ordinary arrests, we can note that by the spring of 1918 a torrent of
socialist traitors had already begun that was to continue without slackening for many years. All these
parties — the SR's, the Mensheviks, the Anarchists, the Popular Socialists — had for decades only
pretended to be revolutionaries; they had worn socialism only as a mask, and for that they went to
hard labor, still pretending. Only during the violent course of the Revolution was the bourgeois
essence of these socialist traitors discovered. What could be more natural than to begin arresting
them! Soon after the outlawing of the Cadets, the dispersal of the Constituent Assembly, the
disarming of the Preobrazhensky and other regiments, they began in a small way to arrest, quietly at
first, both SR's and Mensheviks. After June 14, 1918, the day members of these parties were
excluded from all the Soviets, the arrests proceeded in a more intensive and more coordinated
fashion. From July 6 on, they began to deal with the Left SR's in the same way, though the Left SR's
had been cleverer and had gone on pretending longer that they were allies of the one and only
consistent party of the proletariat. From then on, it was enough for a workers' protest, a disturbance,
a strike, to occur at any factory or in any little town (and there were many of them in the summer of
1918; and in March, 1921, they shook Petrograd, Moscow, and then Kronstadt and forced the
inauguration of the NEP), and — coinciding with concessions, assurances, and the satisfaction for the
just demands of the workers — the Cheka began silently to pick up Mensheviks and SR's at night as
being the people truly to blame for these disorders. In the summer of 1918 and in April and October
of 1919, they jailed Anarchists right and left. In 1919 they arrested all the members of the SR Central
Committee they could catch — and kept them imprisoned in the Butyrki up to the time of their trial in
1922. In that same year, Latsis, a leading Chekist, wrote of the Mensheviks: "People of this sort are
more than a mere hindrance to us. That is why we remove them from our path, so they won't get
under our feet. . . . We put them away in a secluded, cozy place, in the Butyrki, and we are going to
keep them there until the struggle between capital and labor comes to an end." In 1919, also, the
delegates to the Non-Party Workers Congress were arrested; as a result, the Congress never took
place.

In 1919, suspicion of our Russians returning from abroad was already having its effect (Why? What
was their alleged assignment?) — thus the officers of the Russian expeditionary force in France were
imprisoned on their homecoming. In 1919, too, what with the big hauls in connection with such
actual and pseudo plots as the "National Center" and the "Military Plot," executions were carried out
in Moscow, Petrograd, and other cities on the basis of lists — in other words, free people were simply
arrested and executed immediately, and right and left those elements of the intelligentsia considered
close to the Cadets were raked into prison. (What does the term "close to the Cadets" mean? Not
monarchist and not socialist: in other words, all scientific circles, all university circles, all artistic,
literary, yes, and, of course, all engineering circles. Except for the extremist writers, except for the
theologians and theoreticians of socialism, all the rest of the intelligentsia, 80 percent of it, was
"close to the Cadets.") In that category, for example, Lenin placed the writer Korolenko — "a pitiful



petty bourgeois, imprisoned in bourgeois prejudices." He considered it was "not amiss" for such
"talents" to spend a few weeks in prison. From Gorky's protests we learn of individual groups that
were arrested. On September 15, 1919, Lenin replied to him: "It is clear to us that there were some
mistakes." But: "What a misfortune, just think about it! What injustice!" And he advised Gorky "not
to waste [his] energy whimpering over rotten intellectuals."

From January, 1919, on, food requisitioning was organized and food-collecting detachments were set
up. They encountered resistance everywhere in the rural areas, sometimes stubborn and passive,
sometimes violent. The suppression of this opposition gave rise to an abundant flood of arrests
during the course of the next two years, not counting those who were shot on the spot.

I am deliberately bypassing here the major part of the grinding done by the Cheka, the Special
Branches, and the Revolutionary Tribunals as the front line advanced and cities and provinces were
occupied. And that same NKVD directive of August 30, 1918, ordered that efforts be made to ensure
"the unconditional execution of all who had been involved in White Guard work." But sometimes it
is not clear where to draw the line. By the summer of 1920, for example, the Civil War had not
entirely ended everywhere. But it was over on the Don; nonetheless officers were sent from there en
masse — from Rostov, and from Novocherkassk — to Archangel, whence they were transported to the
Solovetsky Islands, and, it is said, several of the barges were sunk in the White Sea and in the
Caspian Sea. Now should this be billed to the Civil War or to the beginning of peacetime
reconstruction? In Novocherkassk, in the same year, they shot the pregnant wife of an officer
because she had hidden her husband. In what classification should she be put?

In May, 1920, came the well-known decree of the Central Committee "on Subversive Activity in the
Rear." We know from experience that every such decree is a call for a new wave of widespread
arrests; it is the outward sign of such a wave.

A particular difficulty — and also a particular advantage — in the organization of all these waves was
the absence of a criminal code or any system of criminal law whatsoever before. 1922. Only a
revolutionary sense of justice (always infallible) guided those doing the purging and managing the
sewage system when they were deciding whom to take and what to do with them.

In this survey we are not going to investigate the successive waves of habitual criminals (ugolovniki)
and nonpolitical offenders (bytoviki). Therefore we will merely recall that the country- wide poverty
and shortages during the period when the government, all institutions, and the laws themselves were
being reorganized could serve only to increase greatly the number of thefts, robberies, assaults,
bribes, and the resale of merchandise for excessive profit (speculation). Even though these crimes
presented less danger to the existence of the Republic, they, too, had to be repressed, and their own
waves of prisoners served to swell the waves of counterrevolutionaries. And there was speculation,
too, of a purely political character, as was pointed out in the decree of the Council of People's
Commissars signed by Lenin on July 22, 1918: "Those guilty of selling, or buying up, or keeping for
sale in the way of business food products which have been placed under the monopoly of the
Republic [A peasant keeps grains for sale in the way of business. What else is his business
anyway?] . . . imprisonment for a term of not less than ten years, combined with the most severe
forced labor and confiscation of all their property."

From that summer on, the countryside, which had already been strained to the utmost Umits, gave up
its harvest year after year without compensation. This led to peasant revolts and, in the upshot,
suppression of the revolts and new arrests.

["The hardest- working sector of the nation was positively uprooted." Korolenko, letter to Gorky,
August 10, 1921.]

It was in 1920 that we knew (or failed to know) of the trial of the "Siberian Peasants' Union." And at



the end of 1920 the repression of the Tambov peasants' rebellion began. There was no trial for them.

But the main drive to uproot people from the Tambov villages took place mostly in June, 1921.
Throughout the province concentration camps were set up for the families of peasants who had taken
part in the revolts. Tracts of open field were enclosed with barbed wire strung on posts, and for three
weeks every family of a suspected rebel was confined there. If within that time the man of the family
did not turn up to buy his family's way out with his own head, they sent the family into exile.

[Tukhachevsky, "Borba s Kontrrevolyutsionnymi Vostaniyami" ("The Struggle Against
Counterrevolutionary Revolts"), in Voina i Revolyutsiya (War and Revolution), 1926, No. 7/8.]

Even earlier, in March, 1921, the rebellious Kronstadt sailors, minus those who had been shot, were
sent to the islands of the Archipelago via the Trubetskoi bastion of the Peter and Paul Fortress.

That same year, 1921, began with Cheka Order No. 10, dated January 8: "To intensify the repression
of the bourgeoisie." Now, when the Civil War had ended, repression was not to be reduced but
intensified! Voloshin has pictured for us in several of his poems how this worked out in the Crimea.

In the summer of 1921, the State Commission for Famine Relief, including Kuskova, Prokopovich,
Kishkin, and others, was arrested. They had tried to combat the unprecedented famine in Russia. The
heart of the matter, however, was that theirs were the wrong hands to be offering food and could not
be allowed to feed the starving. The chairman of this commission, the dying Korolenko, who was
pardoned, called the destruction of the commission "the worst of dirty political tricks, a dirty
political trick by the government."

[Korolenko's letter to Gorky, September 14, 1921. Korolenko also reminds us of a particularly
important situation in the prisons of 1921: "Everywhere they are saturated with typhus." This has
been confirmed by Skripnikova and others imprisoned at the time.]

In that same year the practice of arresting students began (for example, the group of Yevgeniya
Doyarenko in the Timiryazev Academy) for "criticism of the system" (not in public, merely in
conversation among themselves). Such cases, however, were evidently few, because the group in
question was interrogated by Menzhinsky and Yagoda personally.

Also in 1921 the arrests of members of all non-Bolshevik parties were expanded and systematized.
In fact, all Russia's political parties had been buried, except the victorious one. (Oh, do not dig a
grave for someone else!) And so that the dissolution of these parties would be irreversible, it was
necessary that their members should disintegrate and their physical bodies too.

Not one citizen of the former Russian state who had ever joined a party other than the Bolshevik
Party could avoid his fate. He was condemned unless, like Maisky or Vyshinsky, he succeeded in
making his way across the planks of the wreck to the Bolsheviks. He might not be arrested in the
first group. He might live on, depending on how dangerous he was believed to be, until 1922, 1932,
or even 1937, but the lists were kept; his turn would and did come; he was arrested or else politely
invited to an interrogation, where he was asked just one question: Had he been a member of such and
such, from then till then? (There were also questions about hostile activity, but the first question
decided everything, as is clear to us now, decades later.) From there on his fate might vary. Some
were put immediately in one of the famous Tsarist central prisons — fortunately, all the Tsarist
central prisons had been well preserved — and some socialists even ended up in the very same cells
and with the very same jailers they had had before. Others were offered the opportunity of going into
exile — oh, not for long, just for two or three years. And some had it even easier: they were merely
given a minus (a certain number of cities were forbidden) and told to pick out a new place of
residence themselves, and for the future would they please be so kind as to stay fixed in that one
place and await the pleasure of the GPU.



This whole operation was stretched out over many years because it was of primary importance that it
be stealthy and unnoticed. It was essential to clean out, conscientiously, socialists of every other
stripe from Moscow, Petrograd, the ports, the industrial centers, and, later on, the outlying provinces
as well. This was a grandiose silent game of solitaire, whose rules were totally incomprehensible to
its contemporaries, and whose outlines we can appreciate only now. Someone's far-seeing mind,
someone's neat hands, planned it all, without letting one wasted minute go by. They picked up a card
which had spent three years in one pile and softly placed it on another pile. And the person who had
been imprisoned in a central prison was thereby shifted into exile — and a good way off. Someone
who had served out a "minus" sentence was sent into exile, too, but out of sight of the rest of the
"minus" category, or else from exile to exile, and then back again into the central prison — but this
time a different one. Patience, overwhelming patience, was the trait of the person playing out the
solitaire. And without any noise, without any outcry, the members of all the other parties slipped
gradually out of sight, lost all connection with the places and people where they and their
revolutionary activities were known, and thus — imperceptibly and mercilessly — was prepared the
annihilation of those who had once raged against tyranny at student meetings and had clanked their
Tsarist shackles in pride.

[V. G. Korolenko wrote to Gorky, June 29, 1921: "History will someday note that the Bolshevik
Revolution used the same means to deal with true revolutionaries and socalists as did the Tsarist
regime, in other words, purely police measures."]

In this game of the Big Solitaire, the majority of the old political prisoners, survivors of hard labor,
were destroyed, for it was primarily the SR's and the Anarchists — not the Social Democrats — who
had received the harshest sentences from the Tsarist courts. They in particular had made up the
population of the Tsarist hard-labor political prisons.

There was justice in the priorities of destruction, however; in 1920 they were all offered the chance
to renounce in writing their parties and party ideologies. Some declined — and they, naturally, came
up first for annihilation. Others signed such renunciations, and thereby added a few years to their
lifetimes. But their turn, too, came implacably, and their heads rolled implacably from their
shoulders.

[Sometimes, reading a newspaper article, one is astonished to the point of disbelief. In hvestiya of
May 24, 1959, one could read that a year after Hitler came to power Maximilian Hauke was arrested
for belonging to none other than the Communist Party. Was he destroyed? No, they sentenced him to
two years. After this was he, naturally, sentenced to a second term? No, he was released. You can
interpret that as you please! He proceeded to live quietly and build an underground organization, in
connection with which the hvestiya article on his courage appeared.]

In the spring of 1922 the Extraordinary Commission for Struggle Against Counterrevolution,
Sabotage, and Speculation, the Cheka, recently renamed the GPU, decided to intervene in church
affairs. It was called on to carry out a "church revolution" — to remove the existing leadership and
replace it with one which would have only one ear turned to heaven and the other to the Lubyanka.
The so-called "Living Church" people seemed to go along with this plan, but without outside help
they could not gain control of the church apparatus. For this reason, the Patriarch Tikhon was
arrested and two resounding trials were held, followed by the execution in Moscow of those who had
publicized the Patriarch's appeal and, in Petrograd, of the Metropolitan Veniamin, who had
attempted to hinder the transfer of ecclesiastical power to the "Living Church" group. Here and there
in the provincial centers and even further down in the administrative districts, metropolitans and
bishops were arrested, and, as always, in the wake of the big fish, followed shoals of smaller fry:
archpriests, monks, and deacons. These arrests were not even reported in the press. They also
arrested those who refused to swear to support the "Living Church" "renewal" movement.

Men of religion were an inevitable part of every annual "catch," and their silver locks gleamed in



every cell and in every prisoner transport en route to the Solovetsky Islands.

From the early twenties on, arrests were also made among groups of theosophists, mystics,
spiritualists. (Count Palen's group used to keep official transcripts of its communications with the
spirit world.) Also, religious societies and philosophers of the Berdyayev circle. The so-called
"Eastern Catholics" — followers of Vladimir Solovyev — were arrested and destroyed in passing, as
was the group of A. I. Abrikosova. And, of course, ordinary Roman Catholics — Polish Catholic
priests, etc. — were arrested, too, as part of the normal course of events.

However, the root destruction of religion in the country, which throughout the twenties and thirties
was one of the most important goals of the GPU-NKVD, could be realized only by mass arrests of
Orthodox believers. Monks and nuns, whose black habits had been a distinctive feature of Old
Russian life, were intensively rounded up on every hand, placed under arrest, and sent into exile.
They arrested and sentenced active laymen. The circles kept getting bigger, as they raked in ordinary
believers as well, old people, and particularly women, who were the most stubborn believers of all
and who, for many long years to come, would be called "nuns" in transit prisons and in camps.

True, they were supposedly being arrested and tried not for their actual faith but for openly declaring
their convictions and for bringing up their children in the same spirit. As Tanya Khodkevich wrote:

You can pray freely
But just so God alone can hear.

(She received a ten-year sentence for these verses.)

A person convinced that he possessed spiritual truth was required to conceal it from his own
children! In the twenties the religious education of children was classified as a political crime under
Article 58-10 of the Code — in other words, counterrevolutionary propaganda!

True, one was still permitted to renounce one's religion at one's trial: it didn't often happen but it
nonetheless did happen that the father would renounce his religion and remain at home to raise the
children while the mother went to the Solovetsky Islands. (Throughout all those years women
manifested great firmness in their faith.) All persons convicted of religious activity received tenners,
the longest term then given.

(In those years, particularly in 1927, in purging the big cities for the pure society that was coming
into being, they sent prostitutes to the Solovetsky Islands along with the "nuns." Those lovers of a
sinful earthly life were given three-yQM sentences under a more lenient article of the Code. The
conditions in prisoner transports, in transit prisons, and on the Solovetsky Islands were not of a sort
to hinder them from plying their merry trade among the administrators and the convoy guards. And
three years later they would return with laden suitcases to the places they had come from. Religious
prisoners, however, were prohibited from ever returning to their children and their home areas.)

As early as the early twenties, waves appeared that were purely national in character — at first not
very large in proportion to the populations of their homelands, especially by Russian yardsticks:
Mussavatists from Azerbaijan; Dashnaks from Armenia; Georgian Mensheviks; and Turkmenian
Basmachi, who were resisting the establishment of Soviet power in Central Asia. (The first Central
Asian Soviets were Russian in makeup by an overwhelming majority, and were therefore seen as
outposts of Russian power.) In 1926 the Zionist society of "Hehalutz" was exiled in toto — since it
had failed to respond to the all-powerful upsurge of internationalism.

Among subsequent generations, a picture has evolved of the twenties as some kind of holiday of
totally unlimited freedom. In this book we shall encounter people who viewed the twenties quite
differently. The non-Party students at this time sought "autonomy for higher educational



institutions," the right of assembly, and the removal from the curriculum of excessive political
indoctrination. Arrests were the answer. These were intensified during holidays — for example, on
May 1, 1924. In 1925, about one hundred Leningrad students were sentenced to three years in
political detention for reading the Sotsialistichesky Vestnik — the organ of the Mensheviks abroad —
and for studying Plekhanov. (In his youth Plekhanov himself had gotten off far more lightly for
speaking out against the government in front of Kazan Cathedral.) In 1925 they had already begun to
arrest the first (young) Trotskyites. (Two naive Red Army men, remembering the Russian tradition,
began to collect funds for the arrested Trotskyites — and they, too, were put in political detention.)

And, of course, it is obvious that the exploiting classes were not spared. Throughout the twenties the
hunt continued for former officers who had managed to survive: "Whites" (those who had not
already earned execution during the Civil War); "White-Reds," who had fought on both sides; and
"Tsarist Reds," Tsarist officers who had gone over to the Red Army but had not served in it for the
whole period or who had gaps in their army service records and no documents to account for them.
They were truly put through the mill because instead of being sentenced immediately they, too, were
put through the solitaire game: endless verifications, limitations on the kind of work they could do
and on where they could live; they were taken into custody, released, taken into custody again. And
only gradually did they proceed to the camps, from which they did not return.

However, sending these officers to the Archipelago did not end the problem but only set it in motion.
After all, their mothers, wives, and children were still at liberty. With the help of unerring social
analysis it was easy to see what kind of mood they were in after the heads of their households had
been arrested. And thus they simply compelled their own arrest too! And one more wave was set
rolUng.

In the twenties there was an amnesty for Cossacks who had taken part in the Civil War. Many of
them returned from the island of Lemnos to the Kuban, where they were given land. All of them
were subsequently arrested.

And, of course, all former state officials had gone into hiding and were likewise Uable to be hunted
down. They had hidden well and disguised themselves cleverly, making use of the fact that there was
as yet no internal passport system nor any unified system of work-books in the Republic — and they
managed to creep into Soviet institutions. In such cases, slips of the tongue, chance recognitions, and
the denunciations of neighbors helped battle intelligence — so to speak.

(Sometimes sheer accident took a hand. Solely out of a love of order, a certain Mova kept at home a
list of all former employees of the provincial judiciary. This was discovered by accident in 1925, and
they were all arrested and shot.)

And so the waves rolled on — for "concealment of social origin" and for "former social origin." This
received the widest interpretation. They arrested members of the nobility for their social origin. They
arrested members of their families. Finally, unable to draw even simple distinctions, they arrested
members of the "individual nobility" — i.e., anybody who had simply graduated from a university.
And once they had been arrested, there was no way back. You can't undo what has been done! The
Sentinel of the Revolution never makes a mistake!

(No. There were a few ways back! The counterwaves were thin, sparse, but they did sometimes
break through. The first is worthy of mention right here. Among the wives and daughters of the
nobility and the officers there were quite often women of outstanding personal qualities and
attractive appearance. Some succeeded in breaking through in a small reverse wave! They were the
ones who remembered that life is given to us only once and that nothing is more precious to us than
our own life. They offered their services to the Cheka-GPU as informers, as colleagues, in any
capacity whatsoever — and those who were liked were accepted. These were the most fertile of all
informers! They helped the GPU a great deal, because "former" people trusted them. Here one can



name the last Princess Vyazemskaya, a most prominent postrevolutionary informer [as was lier son
on the Solovetsky Islands]. And Konkordiya Nikolayevna losse was evidently a woman of brilliant
qualities: her husband was an officer who had been shot in her presence, and she herself was exiled
to the Solovetsky Islands. But she managed to beg her way out and to set up a salon near the Big
Lubyanka which the important figures of that establishment loved to frequent. She was not arrested
again until 1937, along with her Yagoda customers.)

It is strange to recount, but as a result of an absurd tradition the Political Red Cross had been
preserved from Old Russia.

There were three branches: the Moscow branch (Y. Peshkova-Vinaver); the Kharkov
(Sandormirskaya); and the Petrograd. The one in Moscow behaved itself and was not dissolved until
1937. The one in Petrograd (the old Narodnik Shevtsov, the cripple Gartman, and Kocherovsky)
adopted an intolerably impudent stance, mixed into political cases, tried to get support from such
former inmates of the Schliisselburg Prison as Novorussky, who had been convicted in the same case
as Lenin's brother, Aleksandr Ulyanov, and helped not only socialists but also KR's — Counter-
Re volutionaries. In 1926 it was shut down and its leaders were sent into exile.

The years go by, and everything that has not been freshly recalled to us is wiped from our memory.
In the dim distance, we see the year 1927 as a careless, well-fed year of the still untruncated NEP.
But in fact it was tense; it shuddered as newspaper headlines exploded; and it was considered at the
time, and portrayed to us then, as the threshold of a war for world revolution. The assassination of
the Soviet ambassador in Warsaw, which filled whole columns of the papers that June, aroused
Mayakovsky to dedicate four thunderous verses to the subject.

But here's bad luck for you: Poland offered an apology; Voikov's lone assassin was arrested there —
and so how and against whom was the poet's appeal to be directed?

[Evidently, the monarchist in question assassinated Voikov as an act of private vengeance: it is said
that as Urals Provincial Commissar of Foodstuffs, in July, 1918, P. L. Voikov had directed the
destruction of all traces of the shooting of the Tsar's family (the dissection and dismemberment of
the corpses, the cremation of the remains, and the dispersal of the ashes).]

With cohesion,

construction,

grit,

and repression

Wring the neck

of this gang run riot!

Who was to be repressed? Whose neck should be wrung? It was then that the so-called Voikov draft
began. As always happened when there were incidents of disturbance or tension, they arrested
former people: Anarchists, SR's, Mensheviks, and also the intelligentsia as such. Indeed, who else
was there to arrest in the cities? Not the working class!

But the old "close-to-the-Cadets" intelligentsia had already been thoroughly shaken up, starting in
1919. Had the time not come to shake up that part of the intelligentsia which imagined itself to be
progressive? To give the students a once-over? Once again Mayakovsky came to the rescue:

Think

about the Komsomol
for days and for weeks!
Look over
your ranks.



watch them with care.
Are all of them
really

Komsomols?
Or are they

only

pretending to be?

A convenient world outlook gives rise to a convenient juridical term: social prophylaxis . It was
introduced and accepted, and it was immediately understood by all. (Lazar Kogan, one of the bosses
of the White Sea Canal construction, would, in fact, soon say: "I believe that you personally were not
guilty of anything. But, as an educated person, you have to understand that social prophylaxis was
being widely applied!") And when else, in fact, should unreliable fellow travelers, all that shaky
intellectual rot, be arrested, if not on the eve of the war for world revolution? When the big war
actually began, it would be too late.

And so in Moscow they began a systematic search, block by block. Someone had to be arrested
everywhere. The slogan was: "We are going to bang our fist on the table so hard that the world will
shake with terror!" It was to the Lubyanka, to the Butyrki, that the Black Marias, the passenger cars,
the enclosed trucks, the open hansom cabs kept moving, even by day. There was a jam at the gates, a
jam in the courtyard. They didn't have time to unload and register those they'd arrested. (And the
same situation existed in other cities. In Rostov-on-the-Don during those days the floor was so
crowded in the cellar of House 33 that the newly arrived Boiko could hardly find a place to sit
down.)

A typical example from this wave: Several dozen young people got together for some kind of
musical evening which had not been authorized ahead of time by the GPU. They listened to music
and then drank tea. They got the money for the tea by voluntarily contributing their own kopecks. It
was quite clear, of course, that this music was a cover for counterrevolutionary sentiments, and that
the money was being collected not for tea but to assist the dying world bourgeoisie. And they were
all arrested and given from three to ten years — Anna Skripnikova getting five, while Ivan
Nikolayevich Varentsov and the other organizers of the affair who refused to confess were shot!

And in that same year, somewhere in Paris, a group of Russian emigre Lycee graduates gathered to
celebrate the traditional Pushkin holiday. A report of this was published in the papers. It was clearly
an intrigue on the part of mortally wounded imperialism, and as a result all Lycee graduates still left
in the U.S.S.R. were arrested, as were the so-called "law students" (graduates of another such
privileged special school of prerevolutionary Russia).

Only the size of SLON — the Solovetsky Special Purpose Camp — limited for the time being the scale
of the Voikov draft. But the Gulag Archipelago had already begun its malignant life and would
shortly metastasize throughout the whole body of the nation.

A new taste had been acquired and a new appetite began to grow. The time had long since arrived to
crush the technical intelligentsia, which had come to regard itself as too irreplaceable and had not
gotten used to catching instructions on the wing.

In other words, we never did trust the engineers — and from the very first years of the Revolution we
saw to it that those lackeys and servants of former capitalist bosses were kept in line by healthy
suspicion and surveillance by the workers. However, during the reconstruction period, we did permit
them to work in our industries, while the whole force of the class assault was directed against the rest
of the intelligentsia. But the more our own economic leadership matured — in VSNKh (the Supreme
Council of the Economy) and Gosplan (the State Planning Commission) — the more the number of
plans increased, and the more those plans overlapped and conflicted with one another, the clearer



became the old engineers' basic commitment to wrecking, their insincerity, slyness, venality. The
Sentinel of the Revolution narrowed its eyes with even greater vigilance — and wherever it directed
its narrowed gaze it immediately discovered a nest of wreckers.

This therapy continued full speed from 1927 on, and immediately exposed to the proletariat all the
causes of our economic failures and shortages. There was wrecking in the People's Commissariat of
Railroads — that was why it was hard to get aboard a train, why there were interruptions in supplies.
There was wrecking in the Moscow Electric Power System — and interruptions in power. There was
wrecking in the oil industry — hence the shortage of kerosene. There was wrecking in textiles — hence
nothing for a workingman to wear. In the coal industry there was colossal wrecking — hence no heat!
In the metallurgy, defense, machinery, shipbuilding, chemical, mining, gold and platinum industries,
in irrigation, everywhere there were these pus-filled boils of wrecking! Enemies with slide rules
were on all sides. The GPU puffed and panted in its efforts to grab off and drag off the "wreckers."
In the capitals and in the provinces, GPU coUegiums and proletarian courts kept hard at work, sifting
through this viscous sewage, and every day the workers gasped to learn (and sometimes they didn't
learn) from the papers of new vile deeds. They learned about Palchinsky, von Meek, and Velichko,
and how many others who were nameless.

[ A. F. Velichko, a military engineer, former professor of the Military Academy of the General Staff,
and a lieutenant general, had been in charge of the Administration for Military Transport in the
Tsarist War Ministry. He was shot. Oh, how useful he would have been in 1941 !]

Every industry, every factory, and every handicraft artel had to find wreckers in its ranks, and no
sooner had they begun to look than they found them (with the help of the GPU). If any
prerevolutionary engineer was not yet exposed as a traitor, then he could certainly be suspected of
being one.

And what accomplished villains these old engineers were! What diabolical ways to sabotage they
found! Nikolai Karlovich von Meek, of the People's Commissariat of Railroads, pretended to be
terribly devoted to the development of the new economy, and would hold forth for hours on end
about the economic problems involved in the construction of socialism, and he loved to give advice.
One such pernicious piece of advice was to increase the size of freight trains and not worry about
heavier than average loads. The GPU exposed von Meek, and he was shot: his objective had been to
wear out rails and roadbeds, freight cars and locomotives, so as to leave the Republic without
railroads in case of foreign military intervention! When, not long afterward, the new People's
Commissar of Railroads, Comrade Kaganovich, ordered that average loads should be increased, and
even doubled and tripled them (and for this discovery received the Order of Lenin along with others
of our leaders) — the malicious engineers who protested became known as limiters. They raised the
outcry that this was too much, and would result in the breakdown of the rolling stock, and they were
rightly shot for their lack of faith in the possibilities of socialist transport.

These limiters were pursued for several years. In all branches of the economy they brandished their
formulas and calculations and refused to understand that bridges and lathes could respond to the
enthusiasm of the personnel. (These were the years when all the norms of folk psychology were
turned inside out: the circumspect folk wisdom expressed in such a proverb as "Haste makes waste"
was ridiculed, and the ancient saying that "The slower you go, the farther you'll get" was turned
inside out.) The only thing which at times delayed the arrest of the old engineers was the absence of
a new batch to take their place. Nikolai Ivanovich Ladyzhensky, chief engineer of defense plants in
Izhevsk, was first arrested for "limitation theories" and "blind faith in safety factors" (which
explained why he considered inadequate the funds allocated by Ordzhonikidze for factory
expansion).

[They say that when Ordzhonikidze used to talk with the old engineers, he would put one pistol on
his desk beside his right hand and another beside his left.]



Then they put him under house arrest and ordered him back to work in his old job. Without him the
work was collapsing. He put it back in shape. But the funds allocated were just as inadequate as they
had been earlier, and so once again he was thrown in prison, this time for "incorrect use of funds":
the funds were insufficient, they charged, because the chief engineer had used them inefficiently!
Ladyzhensky died in camp after a year of timbering.

Thus in the course of a few years they broke the back of the Old Russian engineers who had
constituted the glory of the country, who were the beloved heroes of such writers as Garin-
Mikhailovsky, Chekhov, and Zamyatin.

It is to be understood, of course, that in this wave, as in all of them, other people were taken too: for
example, those who had been near and dear to and connected with those doomed. I hesitate to sully
the shining bronze countenance of the Sentinel of the Revolution, yet I must: they also arrested
persons who refused to become informers. We would ask the reader to keep in mind at all times, but
especially in connection with the first postrevolutionary decade, this entirely secret wave, which
never surfaced in public: at that time people still had their pride, and many of them quite failed to
comprehend that morality is a relative thing, having only a narrow class meaning, and they dared to
reject the employment offered them, and they were all punished without mercy. In fact, at this time
young Magdalena Edzhubova was supposed to act as an informer on a group of engineers, and she
not only dared to refuse but also told her guardian (it was against him she was supposed to inform).
However, he was arrested soon anyway, and in the course of the investigation he confessed
everything. Edzhubova, who was pregnant, was arrested for "revealing an operational secret" and
was sentenced to be shot — but subsequently managed to get off with a twenty-five-year string of
sentences. In that same year, 1927, though in a completely different milieu, among the leading
Kharkov Communists, Nadezhda Vitalyevna Surovets refused to become an informer and spy on
members of the Ukrainian government. For this she was arrested by the GPU, and not until a quarter
of a century later did she manage to emerge, barely alive, in the Kolyma. As for those who didn't
survive — of them we know nothing.

(In the thirties this wave of the disobedient fell off to zero: if they asked you to, then it meant you
had to inform — where would you hide? "The weakest go to the wall." "If I don't, someone else will."
"Better me than someone bad." Meanwhile there were plenty of volunteers; you couldn't get away
from them: it was both profitable and praiseworthy.)

In 1928 in Moscow the big Shakhty case came to trial — big in terms of the publicity it was given, in
the startling confessions and self-flagellation of the defendants (though not yet all of them). Two
years later, in September, 1930, the famine organizers were tried with a great hue and cry. (They
were the ones! There they are!) There were forty-eight wreckers in the food industry. At the end of
1930, the trial of the Promparty was put on with even greater fanfare. It had been faultlessly
rehearsed. In this case every single defendant took upon himself the blame for every kind of filthy
rubbish — and then, like a monument unveiled, there arose before the eyes of the workers the
grandiose, cunningly contrived skein in which all the separate wrecking cases previously exposed
were tied into one diabolical knot along with Milyukov, Ryabushinsky, Deterding, and Poincare.

As we begin to understand our judicial practices, we realize now that the public trials were only the
surface indications of the mole's tunnel, and that all the main digging lay beneath the surface. At
these trials only a small number of those arrested were produced in court — only those who agreed to
the unnatural practice of accusing themselves and others in the hope of getting off more easily. The
majority of the engineers, who had the courage and intelligence to reject and refute the interrogators'
stupidities, were tried out of earshot. But even though they did not confess, they got the same tenners
from the Collegium of the GPU.

The waves flowed underground through the pipes; they provided sewage disposal for the life
flowering on the surface.



It was precisely at this moment that an important step was taken toward universal participation in
sewage disposal, universal distribution of responsibility for it. Those who had not yet been swept
bodily down the sewer hatches, who had not yet been carried through the pipes to the Archipelago,
had to march up above, carrying banners praising the trials, and rejoicing at the judicial reprisals.
(And this was very farsighted! Decades would pass, and history would have its eyes opened, but the
interrogators, judges, and prosecutors would turn out to be no more guilty than you and I, fellow
citizens! The reason we possess our worthy gray heads is that in our time we worthily voted "for. ")

Stalin carried out the first such effort in connection with the trial of the famine organizers — and how
could it not succeed when everyone was starving in bounteous Russia, and everyone was always
looking about and asking: "Where did all our dear bread get to?" Therefore, before the court verdict,
the workers and employees wrathfuUy voted for the death penalty for the scoundrels on trial. And by
the time of the Promparty trial, there were universal meetings and demonstrations (including even
school-children). It was the newspaper march of milUons, and the roar rose outside the windows of
the courtroom: "Death! Death! Death!"

At this turning point in our history, there were some lonely voices of protest or abstention — and
very, very great bravery was required to say "No!" in the midst of that roaring chorus of approval. It
is incomparably easier today! (Yet even today people don't very often vote "against") To the extent
that we know about them, it was those same spineless, slushy intellectuals. At the meeting of the
Leningrad Polytechnic Institute, Professor Dmitri ApoUinaryevich Rozhansky abstained (he was an
enemy of capital punishment in general, you see; in the language of science, you see, this was an
irreversible process), and he was arrested then and there! The student Dima Olitsky abstained and
was arrested then and there! Thus all these protests were silenced at the very source.

So far as we know, the gray-mustached working class approved these executions. So far as we know,
from the blazing Komsomols right up to the Party leaders and the legendary army commanders, the
entire vanguard waxed unanimous in approving these executions. Famous revolutionaries,
theoreticians, and prophets, seven years before their own inglorious destruction, welcomed the roar
of the crowd, not guessing then that their own time stood on the threshold, that soon their own names
would be dragged down in that roar of "Scum!" "Filth!"

In fact, for the engineers the rout soon came to an end. At the beginning of 1931 losif Vissarionovich
spake his "Six Conditions" for construction. And His Autocracy vouchsafed as the fifth condition:
We must move from a policy of destruction of the old technical intelligentsia to a policy of concern
for it, of making use of it.

Concern for it! What had happened in the meantime to our just wrath? Where had all our terrible
accusations gone to? At this very moment, as it happened, a trial of "wreckers" in the porcelain
industry was under way (they had been playing their filthy tricks even there!). All the defendants had
damned each other in unison and confessed to everything — and suddenly they cried out in unison
again: "We are innocent!" And they were freed!

(There was even a small reverse wave to be remarked in this particular year: some engineers who
had already been sentenced or put under interrogation were released. Thus D. A. Rozhansky came
back. Should we not say he had won his duel with Stalin? And that if people had been heroic in
exercising their civil responsibilities, there would never have been any reason to write either this
chapter or this whole book?)

That same year Stalin was still engaged in grinding beneath his hoof the long-since prostrate
Mensheviks. (There was a public trial in March, 1931, of the "AU-Union Bureau of Mensheviks,"
Groman, Sukhanov, and Yakubovich, and a certain number of small, scattered, unannounced arrests
took place in addition.)



[The Sukhanov referred to here was the same Sukhanov in whose apartment, on the Karpovka, in
Petrograd, and with whose knowledge (and the guides there nowadays are lying when they say it was
without his knowledge), the Bolshevik Central Committee met on October 10, 1917, and adopted its
decision to launch an armed uprising.]

And suddenly Stalin "reconsidered."

The White Sea folk say of the tide, the water reconsiders, meaning the moment just before it begins
to fall. Well, of course, it is inappropriate to compare the murky soul of Stalin with the water of the
White Sea. And perhaps he didn't reconsider anything whatever. Nor was there any ebb tide. But one
more miracle happened that year. In 1931, following the trial of the Promparty, a grandiose trial of
the Working Peasants Party was being prepared — on the grounds that they existed (never, in actual
fact!) as an enormous organized underground force among the rural intelligentsia, including leaders
of consumer and agricultural cooperatives and the more advanced upper layer of the peasantry, and
supposedly were preparing to overthrow the dictatorship of the proletariat. At the trial of the
Promparty this Working Peasants Party — the TKP — was referred to as if it were already well known
and under detention. The interrogation apparatus of the GPU was working flawlessly: thousands of
defendants had already fully confessed their adherence to the TKP and participation in its criminal
plans. And no less than two hundred thousand "members" altogether were promised by the GPU.
Mentioned as "heading" the party were the agricultural economist Aleksandr Vasilyevich Chayanov;
the future "Prime Minister" N. D. Kondratyev; L. N. Yurovsky; Makarov; and Aleksei Doyarenko, a
professor from the Timiryazev Academy (future Minister of Agriculture).

[He might well have been a better one than those who held the job for the next forty years! But how

strange is human fate! As a matter of principle, Doyarenko was always nonpolitical! When his
daughter used to bring home fellow students who expressed opinions savoring of Socialist
Revolutionary views, he made them leave!]

Then all of a sudden, one lovely night, Stalin reconsidered. Why? Maybe we will never know. Did
he perhaps wish to save his soul? Too soon for that, it would seem. Did his sense of humor come to
the fore — was it all so deadly, monotonous, so bitter-tasting? But no one would ever dare accuse
Stalin of having a sense of humor! Likeliest of all, Stalin simply figured out that the whole
countryside, not just 200,000 people, would soon die of famine anyway, so why go to the trouble?
And instantly the whole TKP trial was called off. All those who had "confessed" were told they
could repudiate their confessions (one can picture their happiness!). And instead of the whole big
catch, only the small group of Kondratyev and Chayanov was hauled in and tried.

[Kondratyev, sentenced to solitary confinement, became mentally ill there and died. Yurovsky also
died. Chayanov was exiled to Alma-Ata after five years in solitary and was arrested again there in
1948.]

(In 1941, the charge against the tortured Vavilov was that the TKP had existed and he had been its
head.)

Paragraph piles on paragraph, year on year — and yet there is no way we can describe in sequence
everything that took place (but the GPU did its job effectively! The GPU never let anything get by!).
But we must always remember that:

• Religious believers, of course, were being arrested uninterruptedly. (There were, nonetheless,
certain special dates and peak periods. There was a "night of struggle against religion" in Leningrad
on Christmas Eve, 1929, when they arrested a large part of the religious intelligentsia and held
them — not just until morning either. And that was certainly no "Christmas tale."

Then in February, 1932, again in Leningrad, many churches were closed simultaneously, while, at



the same time, large-scale arrests were made among the clergy. And there are still more dates and
places, but they haven't been reported to us by anyone.)

• Non-Orthodox sects were also under constant attack, even those sympathetic to Communism.
(Thus, in 1929, they arrested every last member of the communes between Sochi and Khosta. These
communes ran everything — both production and distribution — on a Communist basis, and it was all
done fairly and honestly, in a way the rest of the country won't achieve in a hundred years. But, alas,
they were too literate; they were well read in religious literature; and atheism was not their
philosophy, which combined Baptist and Tolstoyan beliefs with those of Yoga. It appeared that such
a commune was criminal and that it could not bring people happiness.)

In the twenties, a large group of Tolstoyans was exiled to the foothills of the Altai and there they
established communal settlements jointly with the Baptists. When the construction of the Kuznetsk
industrial complex began, they supplied it with food products. Then arrests began — first the teachers
(they were not teaching in accordance with the government programs), and the children ran after the
cars, shouting. And after that the commune leaders were taken.

• The Big Solitaire game played with the socialists went on and on uninterruptedly — of course.

• In 1929, also, those historians who had not been sent abroad in time were arrested: Platonov, Tarle,
Lyubavsky, Gotye, Likhachev, Izmailov, and the outstanding literary scholar M. M. Bakhtin.

• From one end of the country to the other, nationalities kept pouring in. The Yakuts were
imprisoned after the revolt of 1928. The Buryat-Mongols were imprisoned after the uprising of
1929 — and they say about 35,000 were shot, a figure it has been impossible to verify. The Kazakhs
were imprisoned after Budenny's cavalry heroically crushed their revolt in 1930 and 1931. The
Union for Liberation of the Ukraine was put on trial at the beginning of 1930 (Professor Yefremov,
Chekhovsky, Nikovsky, etc.), and, knowing the ratio in our country of what is public to what is
secret, how many others followed in their footsteps? How many were secretly arrested?

Then came the time — slowly, it is true, but surely — when it was the turn of the members of the
ruling Party to do time in prison! At first — from 1927 to 1929 — it was a question of the "workers'
opposition," in other words, the Trotskyites, who had chosen themselves such an unsuccessful
leader. They numbered hundreds at the start; soon there would be thousands. But it's the first step
that's the hardest! Just as these Trotskyites had observed with approval the arrest of members of
other parties, so the rest of the Party now watched approvingly as the Trotskyites were arrested. But
everyone would have his turn. The nonexistent "rightist opposition" would come later, and, limb by
Umb, beginning with its own tail, the ravenous maw would devour itself . . . right up to its head.

From 1928 on, it was time to call to a reckoning those late stragglers after the bourgeoisie — the
NEPmen. The usual practice was to impose on them ever-increasing and finally totally intolerable
taxes. At a certain point they could no longer pay; they were immediately arrested for bankruptcy,
and their property was confiscated. (Small tradesmen such as barbers, tailors, even those who
repaired primus stoves, were only deprived of their licenses to ply their trade.)

There was an economic purpose to the development of the NEPmen wave. The state needed property
and gold, and there was as yet no Kolyma. The famous gold fever began at the end of 1929, only the
fever gripped not those looking for gold but those from whom it was being shaken loose. The
particular feature of this new, "gold" wave was that the GPU was not actually accusing these rabbits
of anything, and was perfectly willing not to send them off to Gulag country, but wished only to take
away their gold by main force. So the prisons were packed, the interrogators were worn to a frazzle,
but the transit prisons, prisoner transports, and camps received only relatively minor reinforcements.

Who was arrested in the "gold" wave? All those who, at one time or another, fifteen years before.



had had a private "business," had been involved in retail trade, had earned wages at a craft, and could
have, according to the GPU's deductions, hoarded gold.

But it so happened that they often had no gold. They had put their money into real estate or
securities, which had melted away or been taken away in the Revolution, and nothing remained.
They had high hopes, of course, in arresting dental technicians, jewelers, and watch repairmen.
Through denunciations, one could learn about gold in the most unexpected places: a veteran lathe
worker had somewhere gotten hold of, and held on to, sixty gold five-ruble pieces from Tsarist
times. The famous Siberian partisan Muravyev had come to Odessa, bringing with him a small bag
full of gold. The Petersburg Tatar draymen all had gold hidden away. Whether or not these things
were so could be discovered only inside prison walls. Nothing — neither proletarian origin nor
revolutionary services — served as a defense against a gold denunciation. All were arrested, all were
crammed into GPU cells in numbers no one had considered possible up to then — but that was all to
the good: they would cough it up all the sooner! It even reached a point of such confusion that men
and women were imprisoned in the same cells and used the latrine bucket in each other's presence —
who cared about those niceties? Give up your gold, vipers! The interrogators did not write up charge
sheets because no one needed their papers. And whether or not a sentence would be pasted on was of
very little interest. Only one thing was important: Give up your gold, viper! The state needs gold and
you don't. The interrogators had neither voice nor strength left to threaten and torture; they had one
universal method: feed the prisoners nothing but salty food and give them no water.

Whoever coughed up gold got water! One gold piece for a cup of fresh water!

People perish for cold metal.

This wave was distinguished from those that preceded and followed it because, even though fewer
than half its victims held their fate in their own hands, some did. If you in fact had no gold, then your
situation was hopeless. You would be beaten, burned, tortured, and steamed to the point of death or
until they finally came to believe you. But if you had gold, you could determine the extent of your
torture, the limits of your endurance, and your own fate. Psychologically, this situation was,
incidentally, not easier but more difficult, because if you made an error you would always be ridden
by a guilty conscience. Of course, anyone who had already mastered the rules of the institution
would yield and give up his gold — that was easier. But it was a mistake to give it up too readily.
They would refuse to believe you had coughed it all up, and they would continue to hold you. But
you'd be wrong, too, to wait too long before yielding: you'd end up kicking the bucket or they'd paste
a term on you out of meanness. One of the Tatar draymen endured all the tortures: he had no gold!
They imprisoned his wife, too, and tortured her, but the Tatar stuck to his story: no gold! Then they
arrested his daughter: the Tatar couldn't take it any more. He coughed up 100,000 rubles. At this
point they let his family go, but slapped a prison term on him. The crudest detective stories and
operas about brigands were played out in real life on a vast national scale.

The introduction of the passport system on the threshold of the thirties also provided the camps with
a good-sized draft of reinforcements. Just as Peter I simplified the social structure, sweeping clean
all the nooks and crannies of the old Russian class system, so our socialist passport system swept
out, in particular, the betwixt-and-between insects. It hit at the clever, homeless portion of the
population which wasn't tied down to anything. In the early stages, people made many mistakes with
those passports — and those not registered at their places of residence, and those not registered as
having left their former places of residence, were raked into the Archipelago, if only for a single
year.

And so the waves foamed and rolled. But over them all, in 1929-1930, billowed and gushed the
multimillion wave of dispossessed kulaks. It was immeasurably large and it could certainly not have
been housed in even the highly developed network of Soviet interrogation prisons (which in any case
were packed full by the "gold" wave). Instead, it bypassed the prisons, going directly to the transit



prisons and camps, onto prisoner transports, into the Gulag country. In sheer size this nonrecurring
tidal wave (it was an ocean) swelled beyond the bounds of anything the penal system of even an
immense state can permit itself. There was nothing to be compared with it in all Russian history. It
was the forced resettlement of a whole people, an ethnic catastrophe. But yet so cleverly were the
channels of the GPU-Gulag organized that the cities would have noticed nothing had they not been
stricken by a strange three-year famine — a famine that came about without drought and without war.

This wave was also distinct from all those which preceded it because no one fussed about with
taking the head of the family first and then working out what to do with the rest of the family. On the
contrary, in this wave they burned out whole nests, whole families, from the start; and they watched
jealously to be sure that none of the children — fourteen, ten, even six years old — got away: to the
last scrapings, all had to go down the same road, to the same common destruction. (This was the first
such experiment — at least in modern history. It was subsequently repeated by Hitler with the Jews,
and again by Stalin with nationalities which were disloyal to him or suspected by him.)

This wave included only pathetically few of those kulaks for whom it was named, in order to draw

the wool over people's eyes. In Russian a kulak is a miserly, dishonest rural trader who grows rich
not by his own labor but through someone else's, through usury and operating as a middleman. In
every locality even before the Revolution such kulaks could be numbered on one's fingers. And the
Revolution totally destroyed their basis of activity. Subsequently, after 1917, by a transfer of
meaning, the name kulakhegan to be applied (in official and propaganda literature, whence it moved
into general usage) to all those who in any way hired workers, even if it was only when they were
temporarily short of working hands in their own families. But we must keep in mind that after the
Revolution it was impossible to pay less than a fair wage for all such labor — the Committees of the
Poor and the village Soviets looked after the interests of landless laborers. Just let somebody try to
swindle a landless laborer! To this very day, in fact, the hiring of labor at a fair wage is permitted in
the Soviet Union.

But the inflation of this scathing term kulak proceeded relentlessly, and by 1930 all strong peasants
in general were being so called — all peasants strong in management, strong in work, or even strong
merely in convictions. The term kulak was used to smash the strength of the peasantry. Let us
remember, let us open our eyes: only a dozen years had passed since the great Decree on the Land —
that very decree without which the peasants would have refused to follow the Bolsheviks and
without which the October Revolution would have failed. The land was allocated in accordance with
the number of "mouths" per family, equally. It had been only nine years since the men of the
peasantry had returned from the Red Army and rushed onto the land they had wrested for
themselves. Then suddenly there were kulaks and there were poor peasants. How could that be?
Sometimes it was the result of differences in initial stock and equipment; sometimes it may have
resulted from luck in the mixture of the family. But wasn't it most often a matter of hard work and
persistence? And now these peasants, whose breadgrain had fed Russia in 1928, were hastily
uprooted by local good-for-nothings and city people sent in from outside. Like raging beasts,
abandoning every concept of "humanity," abandoning all humane principles which had evolved
through the millennia, they began to round up the very best farmers and their families, and to drive
them, stripped of their possessions, naked, into the northern wastes, into the tundra and the taiga.

Such a mass movement could not help but develop subsequent ramifications. It became necessary to
rid the villages also of those peasants who had merely manifested an aversion to joining the
collective farms, or an absence of inclination for the collective life, which they had never seen with
their own eyes, about which they knew nothing, and which they suspected (we now know how well
founded their suspicions were) would mean a life of forced labor and famine under the leadership of
loafers. Then it was also necessary to get rid of those peasants, some of them not at all prosperous,
who, because of their daring, their physical strength, their determination, their outspokenness at
meetings, and their love of justice, were favorites with their fellow villagers and by virtue of their
independence were therefore dangerous to the leadership of the collective farm.



[This kind of peasant and his fate were portrayed immortally in the character of Stepan Chausov in
S. Zalygin's novel.]

Beyond this, in every village there were people who in one way or another had personally gotten in
the way of the local activists. This was the perfect time to settle accounts with them of jealousy,
envy, insult. A new word was needed for all these new victims as a class — and it was born. By this
time it had no "social" or "economic" content whatsoever, but it had a marvelous sound:
podkulachnik — "a person aiding the kulaks. " In other words, I consider you an accomplice of the
enemy. And that finishes you! The most tattered landless laborer in the countryside could quite
easily be labeled a podkulachnik.

[ I remember very well that in our youth this term seemed quite logical; there was nothing in the
least unclear about it.]

And so it was that these two terms embraced everything that constituted the essence of the village, its
energy, its keenness of wit, its love of hard work, its resistance, and its conscience. They were torn
up by the roots — and collectivization was accomplished.

But new waves rolled from the collectivized villages: one of them was a wave of agricultural
wreckers. Everywhere they began to discover wrecker agronomists who up until that year had
worked honestly all their lives but who now purposely sowed weeds in Russian fields (on the
instructions, of course, of the Moscow institute, which had now been totally exposed; indeed, there
were those same 200,000 unarrested members of the Working Peasants Party, the TKP!). Certain
agronomists failed to put into effect the profound instructions of Lysenko — and in one such wave, in
1931, Lorkh, the so-called "king" of the potato, was sent to Kazakhstan. Others carried out the
Lysenko directives too precisely and thus exposed their absurdity. (In 1934 Pskov agronomists
sowed flax on the snow — exactly as Lysenko had ordered. The seeds swelled up, grew moldy, and
died. The big fields lay empty for a year. Lysenko could not say that the snow was a kulak or that he
himself was an ass. He accused the agronomists of being kulaks and of distorting his technology.
And the agronomists went off to Siberia.) Beyond all this, in almost every Machine and Tractor
Station wrecking in the repairing of tractors was discovered — and that is how the failures of the first
collective farm years were explained!

There was a wave "for harvest losses" (losses in comparison with the arbitrary harvest figures
announced the preceding spring by the "Commission for Determination of the Harvest").

There was a wave "for failure to fulfill obligations undertaken for delivery to the state of
breadgrains" — the District Party Committee had undertaken the obligation, and the collective farm
had not fulfilled it: go to prison!

There was a wave for snipping ears, the nighttime snipping of individual ears of grain in the field — a
totally new type of agricultural activity, a new type of harvesting! The wave of those caught doing
this was not small — it included many tens of thousands of peasants, many of them not even adults
but boys, girls, and small children whose elders had sent them out at night to snip, because they had
no hope of receiving anything from the collective farm for their daytime labor. For this bitter and not
very productive occupation (an extreme of poverty to which the peasants had not been driven even in
serfdom) the courts handed out a full measure: ten years for what ranked as an especially dangerous
theft of socialist property under the notorious law of August 7, 1932 — which in prisoners' lingo was
known simply as the law of Seven-eighths.

This law of "Seven-eighths" produced another big, separate wave from the construction projects of
the First and Second Five- Year Plans, from transport, trade, and industry. Big thefts were turned
over to the NKVD. This wave must further be kept in mind as one that kept on flowing steadily for
the next fifteen years, until 1947, especially during the war years. (Then in 1947 the original law was



expanded and made more harsh.)

Now at last we can catch our breath! Now at last all the mass waves are coming to an end! Comrade
Molotov said on May 17, 1933: "We do not see our task as being mass repressions." Whew! At last!
Begone, nighttime fears! But what's that dog howling out there? Go get 'em. Go get 'em.

And here we are! The Kirov wave from Leningrad has begun. While it lasted the tension was
acknowledged to be so great that special staffs of the NKVD were set up in each and every District
Executive Committee of the city and an "accelerated" judicial procedure was introduced. (Even
earlier, it had not been famous for being slow.) And there was no right of appeal. (There had been no
appeal earlier.) It is also believed that one-quarter of Leningrad was purged — cleaned out — in 1934-
1935.

Let this estimate be disproved by those who have the exact statistics and are willing to publish them.
(To be sure, this wave took in much more than Leningrad alone. It had a substantial impact on the
rest of the country in a form that was consistent though chaotic: the firing from the civil service of all
those still left there whose fathers had been priests, all former noble- women, and all persons having
relatives abroad.)

Among such lashing waves as this, certain modest, changeless wavelets always got lost; they were
little heard of, but they, too, kept flowing on and on:

• There were Schutzbiindlers who had lost the class battles in Vienna and had come to the Fatherland
of the world proletariat for refuge.

• There were Esperantists — a harmful group which Stalin undertook to smoke out during the years
when Hitler was doing the same thing.

• There were the unliquidated remnants of the Free Philosophic Society — illegal philosophical
circles.

• There were teachers who disagreed with the advanced laboratory-team system of instruction. (In
1933, for instance, Natalya Ivanovna Bugayenko was arrested by the Rostov GPU — but in the third
month of her interrogation, a government decree suddenly announced that the system was a faulty
one. And she was let go.)

• There were employees of the Political Red Cross, which, through the efforts of Yekaterina
Peshkova, was still defending its existence.

• There were mountain tribes of the North Caucasus who were arrested for their 1935 revolt. And
non-Russian nationalities kept rolling in from one area, then another. (On the Volga Canal
construction site newspapers were published in four national languages: Tatar, Turkish, Uzbek, and
Kazakh. And, of course, there were readers to read them!)

• There were once again believers, who this time were unwilling to work on Sundays. (They had
introduced the five and the six-day week.) And there were collective farmers sent up for sabotage
because they refused to work on religious feast days, as had been their custom in the era of
individual farms.

• And, always, there were those who refused to become NKVD informers. (Among them were
priests who refused to violate the secrecy of the confessional, for the Organs had very quickly
discovered how useful it was to learn the content of confessions — the only use they found for
religion.)



• And members of non-Orthodox sects were arrested on an ever-wider scale.

• And the Big Solitaire game with the socialists went on and on.

And last of all there was a category I have not yet named, a wave that was continually flowing:
Section 10, also known as KRA (Counter-Revolutionary Agitation) and also known as ASA (Anti-
Soviet Agitation). The wave of Section 10 was perhaps the most constant of all. It never stopped, and
whenever there was another big wave, as, for instance, in 1937, 1945, and 1949, its waters became
particularly swollen.

[This particular unremitting wave grabbed up anyone at all at any moment. But when it came to
outstanding intellectuals in the thirties, they sometimes considered it cleverer to fabricate a case
based on some conspicuously shameful violation (like pederasty; or, in the case of Professor Pletnev,
the allegation that, left alone with a woman patient, he bit her breast. A national newspaper reports
such an incident — and just try to deny it!).]

Paradoxically enough, every act of the all-penetrating, eternally wakeful Organs, over a span of
many years, was based solely on one article of the 140 articles of the nongeneral division of the
Criminal Code of 1926. One can find more epithets in praise of this article than Turgenev once
assembled to praise the Russian language, or Nekrasov to praise Mother Russia: great, powerful,
abundant, highly ramified, multiform, wide-sweeping 58, which summed up the world not so much
through the exact terms of its sections as in their extended dialectical interpretation.

Who among us has not experienced its all-encompassing embrace? In all truth, there is no step,
thought, action, or lack of action under the heavens which could not be punished by the heavy hand
of Article 58.

The article itself could not be worded in such broad terms, but it proved possible to interpret it this
broadly.

Article 58 was not in that division of the Code dealing with political crimes; and nowhere was it
categorized as "political." No. It was included, with crimes against public order and organized
gangsterism, in a division of "crimes against the state." Thus the Criminal Code starts off by refusing
to recognize anyone under its jurisdiction as a political offender. All are simply criminals.

Article 58 consisted of fourteen sections.

In Section 1 we learn that any action (and, according to Article 6 of the Criminal Code, any absence
of action) directed toward the weakening of state power was considered to be counterrevolutionary.

Broadly interpreted, this turned out to include the refusal of a prisoner in camp to work when in a
state of starvation and exhaustion. This was a weakening of state power. And it was punished by
execution. (The execution of malingerers during the war.)

From 1934 on, when we were given back the term Motherland, subsections were inserted on treason
to the Motherland — la, lb, Ic, Id. According to these subsections, all actions directed against the
military might of the U.S.S.R. were punishable by execution (lb), or by ten years' imprisonment
(la), but the lighter penalty was imposed only when mitigating circumstances were present and upon
civilians only.

Broadly interpreted: when our soldiers were sentenced to only ten years for allowing themselves to
be taken prisoner (action injurious to Soviet military might), this was humanitarian to the point of
being illegal. According to the Stalinist code, they should all have-been shot on their return home.



(Here is another example of broad interpretation. I remember well an encounter in the Butyrki in the
summer of 1946. A certain Pole had been bom in Lemberg when that city was part of the Austro-
Hungarian Empire. Until World War II he lived in his native city, by then located in Poland; then he
went to Austria, where he entered the service, and in 1945 he was arrested there by the Russians.
Since by this time Austrian Lemberg had become Ukrainian Lvov, he received a tenner under Article
54- la of the Ukrainian Criminal Code: i.e., for treason to his motherland, the Ukraine! And at his
interrogation the poor fellow couldn't prove that treason to the Ukraine had not been his purpose
when he went to Vienna! And that's how he conned his way into becoming a traitor.)

One important additional broadening of the section on treason was its application "via Article 19 of
the Criminal Code"- -"via intent." In other words, no treason had taken place; but the interrogator
envisioned an intention to betray — and that was enough to justify a full term, the same as for actual
treason. True, Article 19 proposes that there be no penalty for intent, but only for preparation, but
given a dialectical reading one can understand intention as preparation. And "preparation is punished
in the same way [i.e., with the same penalty] as the crime itself" (Criminal Code). In general, "we
draw no distinction between intention and the crime itself, and this is an instance of the superiority
of Soviet legislation to bourgeois legislation."

[A. Y. Vyshinsky (editor), Ot Tyurem k Vospitatelnym Uchrezhdeniyam (From Prisons to
Rehabilitative Institutions), a collection of articles published by the Criminal Policy Institute,
Moscow, Sovetskoye Zakonodatelstvo Publishing House, 1934.]

Section 2 listed armed rebellion, seizure of power in the capital or in the provinces, especially for the
purpose of severing any part of the U.S.S.R. through the use of force. For this the penalties ranged
up to and included execution (as in every succeeding section).

This was expanded to mean something which could not be explicitly stated in the article itself but
which revolutionary sense of justice could be counted on to suggest: it applied to every attempt of
any national republic to act upon its right to leave the U.S.S.R. After all, the word "force" is not
defined in terms of whom it applies to. Even when the entire population of a republic wants to
secede, if Moscow is opposed, the attempted secession will he forcible. Thus, all Estonian, Latvian,
Lithuanian, Ukrainian, and Turkestan nationalists very easily received their tens and their twenty-
fives under this section.

Section 3 was "assisting in any way or by any means a foreign state at war with the U.S.S.R."

This section made it possible to condemn any citizen who had been in occupied territory — whether
he had nailed on the heel of a German soldier's shoe or sold him a bunch of radishes. And it could be
applied to any citizeness who had helped Uft the fighting spirit of an enemy soldier by dancing and
spending the night with him. Not everyone was actually sentenced under this section — because of
the huge numbers who had been in occupied territory. But everyone who had been in occupied
territory could have been sentenced under it.

Section 4 spoke about (fantastic!) aid to the international bourgeoisie.

To whom, one wonders, could this possibly refer? And yet, broadly interpreted, and with the help of
a revolutionary conscience, it was easy to find categories: All emigres who had left the country
before 1920, i.e., several years before the Code was even written, and whom our armies came upon
in Europe a quarter-century later — in 1944 and 1945 — received 58-4: ten years or execution. What
could they have been doing abroad other than aiding the international bourgeoisie? (In the example
of the young people's musical society already cited, we have seen that the international bourgeoisie
could also be aided from inside the U.S.S.R.) They were, in addition, aided by all SR's, all
Mensheviks (the section was drafted with them in mind), and, subsequently, by the engineers of the
State Planning Commission and the Supreme Council of the Economy.



Section 5 was inciting a foreign state to declare war against the U.S.S.R.

A chance was missed to apply this section against Stalin and his diplomatic and'military circle in
1940 — 1941. Their blindness and insanity led to just that. Who if not they drove Russia into
shameful, unheard-of defeats, incomparably worse than the defeats of Tsarist Russia in 1904 or
1915? Defeats such as Russia had never known since the thirteenth century.

Section 6 was espionage.

This section was interpreted so broadly that if one were to count up all those sentenced under it one
might conclude that during Stalin's time our people supported life not by agriculture or industry, but
only by espionage on behalf of foreigners, and by living on subsidies from foreign intelligence
services. Espionage was very convenient in its simplicity, comprehensible both to an undeveloped
criminal and to a learned jurist, to a journalist and to public opinion.

[And very likely spy mania was not merely the narrow-minded predilection of Stalin alone. It was
very useful for everyone who possessed any privileges. It became the natural justification for
increasingly widespread secrecy, the withholding of information, closed doors and security passes,
fenced-off dachas and secret, restricted special shops. People had no way of penetrating the armor
plate of spy mania and learning how the bureaucracy made its cozy arrangements, loafed, blundered,
ate, and took its amusements.]

The breadth of interpretation of Section 6 lay further in the fact that people were sentenced not only
for actual espionage but also for:

PSh — Suspicion of Espionage — or NSh — Unproven Espionage — for which they gave the whole
works.

And even SVPSh — Contacts Leading to (!) Suspicion of Espionage.

In other words, let us say that an acquaintance of an acquaintance of your wife had a dress made by
the same seamstress (who was, of course, an NKVD agent) used by the wife of a foreign diplomat.

These 58-6 PSh's and SVPSh's were sticky sections. They required the strict confinement and
incessant supervision of those convicted (for, after all, an intelligence service might reach out its
tentacles to its protege even in a camp); also, such prisoners could be moved only under convoy —
armed escort. In general, all the lettered articles — which were, in fact, not articles of the Code at all
but frightening combinations of capital letters (and we shall encounter more of them in this
chapter) — always contained a touch of the enigmatic, always remained incomprehensible, and it
wasn't at all clear whether they were offshoots of Article 58 or independent and extremely
dangerous. In many camps prisoners convicted under the provisions of these lettered articles were
subjected to restrictions even more stringent than those of the ordinary 58's.

Section 7 applied to subversion of industry, transport, trade, and the circulation of money.

In the thirties, extensive use was made of this section to catch masses of people — under the
simplified and widely understood catchword wrecking. In reality, everything enumerated under
Section 7 was very obviously and plainly being subverted daily. So didn't someone have to be guilty
of it all? For centuries the people had built and created, always honorably, always honestly, even for
serf-owners and nobles. Yet no one, from the days of Ryurik on, had ever heard of wrecking. But
now, when for the first time all the wealth had come to belong to the people, hundreds of thousands
of the best sons of the people inexplicably rushed off to wreck. (Section 7 did not provide for
wrecking in agriculture, but since it was impossible otherwise to explain rationally how and why the
fields were choked with weeds, why harvests were falUng off, why machines were breaking down.



then dialectic sensitivity brought agriculture, too, under its sway.)

Section 8 covered terror (not that terror from above for which the Soviet Criminal Code was
supposed to "provide a foundation and basis in legality," but terrorism from below).

Terror was construed in a very broad sense, not simply a matter of putting bombs under governors'
carriages, but, for example, smashing in the face of a personal enemy if he was an activist in the
Party, the Komsomol, or the police! — that was already terror. The murder of an activist, especially,
was always treated more seriously than the murder of an ordinary person (as in the Code of
Hammurabi in the eighteenth century B.C.). If a husband killed his wife's lover, it was very fortunate
for him if the victim turned out not to be a Party member; he would be sentenced under Article 136
as a common criminal, who was a "social ally" and didn't require an armed escort. But if the lover
turned out to have been a Party member, the husband became an enemy of the people, with a 58-8
sentence.

An even more important extension of the concept was attained by interpreting Section 8 in terms of
that same Article 19, i.e., intent in the sense of preparation, to include not only a direct threat against
an activist uttered near a beer hall ("Just you wait!") but also the quick-tempered retort of a peasant
woman at the market ("Oh, drop dead!"). Both qualified as TN — Terrorist Intent — and provided a
basis for applying the article in all its severity.

[This sounds Uke an exaggeration, a farce, but it was not I who invented that farce. I was in prison
with these individuals.]

Section 9 concerned destruction or damage by explosion or arson (always with a
counterrevolutionary purpose), for which the abbreviated term was "diversion" — in other words,
sabotage.

The expansion of this section was based on the fact that the counterrevolutionary purpose could be
discerned by the interrogator, who knew best what was going on in the criminal's mind. And every
human error, failure, mistake at work or in the production process, remained unforgiven, and was
therefore considered to be a case of "diversion."

But there was no section in Article 58 which was interpreted as broadly and with so ardent a
revolutionary conscience as Section 10. Its definition was: "Propaganda or agitation, containing an
appeal for the overthrow, subverting, or weakening of the Soviet power . . . and, equally, the
dissemination or preparation or possession of literary materials of similar content." For this section
in peacetime a minimum penalty only was set (not any less! not too light!); no upper limit was set for
the maximum penalty.

Such was the fearlessness of the great Power when confronted by the word of a subject.

The famous extensions of this famous section were as follows: The scope of "agitation containing an
appeal" was enlarged to include a face-to-face conversation between friends or even between
husband and wife, or a private letter. The word "appeal" could mean personal advice. And we say
"could mean" because, in fact, it did.

"Subverting and weakening" the government could include any idea which did not coincide with or
rise to the level of intensity of the ideas expressed in the newspaper on any particular day. After all,
anything which does not strengthen must weaken: Indeed, anything which does not completely fit in,
coincide, subverts!

And he who sings not with us today
is against



us!

— MAYAKOVSKY



The term "preparation of literary materials" covered every letter, note, or private diary, even when
only the original document existed.

Thus happily expanded, what thought was there, whether merely in the mind, spoken aloud, or jotted
down, which was not covered by Section 10?

Section 1 1 was a special one; it had no independent content of its own, but provided for an
aggravating factor in any of the preceding ones: if the action was undertaken by an organization or if
the criminal joined an organization.

In actual practice, the section was so broadened that no organization whatever was required. I myself
experienced the subtle application of this section. Two of us had secretly exchanged thoughts — in
other words we were the beginnings of an organization, in other words an organization!

Section 12 concerned itself closely with the conscience of our citizens: it dealt with the failure to
make a denunciation of any action of the types listed. And the penalty for the mortal sin of failure to
make a denunciation carried no maximum limit!

This section was in itself such a fantastic extension of everything else that no further extension was
needed. He knew and he did not tell became the equivalent of "He did it himself" !

Section 13, presumably long since out of date, had to do with service in the Tsarist secret police —
the Okhrana. (A subsequent form of analogous service was, on the contrary, considered patriotic.)

[There are psychological bases for suspecting I. Stalin of having been liable under this section of
Article 58 also. By no means all the documents relating to this type of service survived February,
1917, to become matters of public knowledge. V. F. Dzhunkovsky a former Tsarist police director,
who died in the Kolyma, declared that the hasty burning of police archives in the first days of the
February Revolution was a joint effort on the part of certain self-interested revolutionaries.]

Section 14 stipulated the penalties for "conscious failure to carry out defined duties or intentionally
careless execution of same." In brief this was called "sabotage" or "economic counter-revolution" —
and the penalties, of course, included execution.

It was only the interrogator who, after consulting his revolutionary sense of justice, could separate
what was intentional from what was unintentional. This section was applied to peasants who failed to
come across with food deliveries. It was also applied to collective farmers who failed to work the
required minimum number of "labor days"; to camp prisoners who failed to complete their work
norms; and, in a peculiar ricochet, after the war it came to be applied to members of Russia's
organized underworld of thieves, the blatnye or blatari, for escaping from camp. In other words, by
an extension, a thief s flight from camp was interpreted as subversion of the camp system rather than
as a dash to freedom.

Such was the last rib of the fan of Article 58 — a fan whose spread encompassed all human existence.

Now that we have completed our review of this great Article of the Criminal Code, we are less likely
to be astounded further on. Wherever the law is, crime can be found.

The damascene steel of Article 58, first tried out in 1927, right after it was forged, was wetted by all
the waves of the following decade, and with whistle and slash was used to the full to deal telling
blows in the law's attack upon the people in 1937-1938.



Here one has to make the point that the 1937 operation was not arbitrary or accidental, but well
planned well ahead of time, and that in the first half of that year many Soviet prisons were re-
equipped. Cots were taken out of the cells and continuous one- or two-storied board benches or
bunks were built.

[It was similarly not by chance that the "Big House" in Leningrad was finished in 1934, just in time
for Kirov's asassination.]

Old prisoners claim to remember that the first blow allegedly took the form of mass arrests, striking
virtually throughout the whole country on one single August night. (But, knowing our clumsiness, I
don't really believe this.) In that autumn, when people were trustingly expecting a big, nationwide
amnesty on the twentieth anniversary of the October Revolution, Stalin, the prankster, added
unheard-of fifteen- and twenty -year prison terms to the Criminal Code.

[The twenty-five-year term was added for the thirtieth anniversary of the Revolution in 1947.]

There is hardly any need to repeat here what has already been widely written, and will be written
many times more, about 1937: that a crushing blow was dealt the upper ranks of the Party, the
government, the military command, and the GPU-NKVD itself.

[These days, as we observe the Chinese Cultural Revolution at the same stage — in the seventeenth
year after its final victory — we can begin to consider it very likely that there exists a fundamental
law of historical development. And even Stalin himself begins to seem only a blind and perfunctory
executive agent.]

There was hardly one province of the Soviet Union in which the first secretary of the Party
Committee or the Chairman of the Provincial Executive Committee survived. Stalin picked more
suitable people for his purposes.

Olga Chavchavadze tells how it was in Tbilisi. In 1938 the Chairman of the City Executive
Committee, his first deputy, department chiefs, their assistants, all the chief accountants, all the chief
economists were arrested. New ones were appointed in their places. Two months passed, and the
arrests began again: the chairman, the deputy, all eleven department chiefs, all the chief accountants,
all the chief economists. The only people left at liberty were ordinary accountants, stenographers,
charwomen, and messengers. . . .

In the arrest of rank-and-file members of the Party there was evidently a hidden theme not directly
stated anywhere in the indictments and verdicts: that arrests should be carried out predominantly
among Party members who had joined before 1924. This was pursued with particular rigor in
Leningrad, because all of them there had signed the "platform" of the New Opposition. (And how
could they have refused to sign? How could they have refused to "trust" their Leningrad Provincial
Party Committee?)

Here is one vignette from those years as it actually occurred. A district Party conference was under
way in Moscow Province. It was presided over by a new secretary of the District Party Committee,
replacing one recently arrested. At the conclusion of the conference, a tribute to Comrade Stalin was
called for. Of course, everyone stood up (just as everyone had leaped to his feet during the
conference at every mention of his name). The small hall echoed with "stormy applause, rising to an
ovation." For three minutes, four minutes, five minutes, the "stormy applause, rising to an ovation,"
continued. But palms were getting sore and raised arms were already aching. And the older people
were panting from exhaustion. It was becoming insufferably silly even to those who really adored
Stalin. However, who would dare be \hQ first to stop? The secretary of the District Party Committee
could have done it. He was standing on the platform, and it was he who had just called for the
ovation. But he was a newcomer. He had taken the place of a man who'd been arrested. He was



afraid! After all, NKVD men were standing in the hall applauding and watching to see who quit first!
And in that obscure, small hall, unknown to the Leader, the applause went on — six, seven, eight
minutes! They were done for! Their goose was cooked! They couldn't stop now till they collapsed
with heart attacks! At the rear of the hall, which was crowded, they could of course cheat a bit, clap
less frequently, less vigorously, not so eagerly — but up there with the presidium where everyone
could see them? The director of the local paper factory, an independent and strong-minded man,
stood with the presidium. Aware of all the falsity and all the impossibility of the situation, he still
kept on applauding! Nine minutes! Ten! In anguish he watched the secretary of the District Party
Committee, but the latter dared not stop. Insanity! To the last man! With make-believe enthusiasm
on their faces, looking at each other with faint hope, the district leaders were just going to go on and
on applauding till they fell where they stood, till they were carried out of the hall on stretchers! And
even then those who were left would not falter. . . . Then, after eleven minutes, the director of the
paper factory assumed a businesslike expression and sat down in his seat. And, oh, a miracle took
place! Where had the universal, uninhibited, indescribable enthusiasm gone? To a man, everyone
else stopped dead and sat down. They had been saved! The squirrel had been smart enough to jump
off his revolving wheel.

That, however, was how they discovered who the independent people were. And that was how they
went about eliminating them. That same night the factory director was arrested. They easily pasted
ten years on him on the pretext of something quite different. But after he had signed Form 206, the
final document of the interrogation, his interrogator reminded him:

"Don't ever be the first to stop applauding!"

[Told me by N. G ko.]

(And just what are we supposed to do? How are we supposed to stop?)

Now that's what Darwin's natural selection is. And that's also how to grind people down with
stupidity.

But today a new myth is being created. Every story of 1937 that is printed, every reminiscence that is
published, relates without exception the tragedy of the Communist leaders. They have kept on
assuring us, and we have unwittingly fallen for it, that the history of 1937 and 1938 consisted chiefly
of the arrests of the big Communists — and virtually no one else. But out of the millions arrested at
that time, important Party and state officials could not possibly have represented more than 10
percent. Most of the relatives standing in line with food parcels outside the Leningrad prisons were
lower-class women, the sort who sold milk.

The composition of the hordes who were arrested in that powerful wave and lugged off, half-dead, to

the Archipelago was of such fantastic diversity that anyone who wants to deduce the rationale for it
scientifically will rack his brain a long time for the answer. (To the contemporaries of the purge it
was still more incomprehensible.)

The real law underlying the arrests of those years was the assignment of quotas, the norms set, the
planned allocations. Every city, every district, every military unit was assigned a specific quota of
arrests to be carried out by a stipulated time. From then on everything else depended on the ingenuity
of the Security operations personnel.

The former Chekist Aleksandr Kalganov recalls that a telegram arrived in Tashkent: "Send 200!"
They had just finished one clean-out, and it seemed as if there was "no one else" to take. Well, true,
they had just brought in about fifty more from the districts. And then they had an idea! They would
reclassify as 58's all the nonpolitical offenders being held by the police. No sooner said than done.
But despite that, they had still not filled the quota. At that precise moment the police reported that a



gypsy band had impudently encamped on one of the city squares and asked what to do with them.
Someone had another bright idea! They surrounded the encampment and raked in all the gypsy men
from seventeen to sixty as 58's! They had fulfilled the plan!

This could happen another way as well: according to Chief of Police Zabolovsky, the Chekists of
Ossetia were given a quota of five hundred to be shot in the Republic. They asked to have it
increased, and they were permitted another 250.

Telegrams transmitting instructions of this kind were sent via ordinary channels in a very
rudimentary code. In Temryuk the woman telegrapher, in holy innocence, transmitted to the NKVD
switchboard the message that 240 boxes of soap were to be shipped to Krasnodar the following day.
In the morning she learned about a big wave of arrests and guessed the meaning of the message! She
told her girl friend what kind of telegram it was — and was promptly arrested herself.

(Was it indeed totally by chance that the code words for human beings were a box of soap? Or were
they familiar with soap-making?)

Of course, certain patterns could be discerned.

Among those arrested were:

Our own real spies abroad. (These were often the most dedicated Comintern workers and Chekists,
and among them were many attractive women. They were called back to the Motherland and arrested
at the border. They were then confronted with their former Comintern chief, for example, Mirov-
Korona, who confirmed that he himself had been working for one of the foreign intelligence
services — which meant that his subordinates were automatically guilty too. And the more dedicated
they were, the worse it was for them.)

Soviet employees of the Chinese Eastern Railroad, the KVZhD, were one and all arrested as
Japanese spies, including their wives, children, and grandmothers. But we have to admit these arrests
had already begun several years earlier.

Koreans from the Far East were sent into exile in Kazakhstan — the first experiment in mass arrests
on the basis of race.

Leningrad Estonians were all arrested on the strength of having Estonian family names and charged
with being anti-Communist Estonian spies.

All Latvian Riflemen and all Latvian Chekists were arrested. Yes, indeed, those very Latvians who
had been the midwives of the Revolution, who just a short while before had constituted the nucleus
and the pride of the Cheka! And with them were taken even those Communists of bourgeois Latvia
who had been exchanged in 1921 — and been freed thereby from their dreadful Latvian prison terms
of two and three years. (In Leningrad, the Latvian Department of the Herzen Institute, the House of
Latvian Culture, the Estonian Club, the Latvian Technicum, and the Latvian and Estonian
newspapers were all closed down.)

In the midst of the general to-do, the Big Solitaire game was finally wound up. All those not yet
taken were raked in. There was no longer any reason to keep it secret. The time had come to write
"finis" to the whole game. So now the socialists were taken off to prison in whole "exiles" (for
example, the Ufa "exile" and the Saratov "exile"), and they were all sentenced together and driven
off in herds to the slaughterhouses of the Archipelago.

Nowhere was it specifically prescribed that more members of the intelligentsia should be arrested
than of other groups. But just as the intelligentsia had never been overlooked in previous waves, it



was not neglected in this one. A student's denunciation (and this combination of words, "student"
and "denunciation," had ceased to sound outlandish) that a certain lecturer in a higher educational
institution kept citing Lenin and Marx frequently but Stalin not at all was all that was needed for the
lecturer not to show up for lectures any more. And what if he cited no one? All Leningrad
Orientalists of the middle and younger generation were arrested. The entire staff of the Institute of
the North, except for its NKVD informers, was arrested. They even went after schoolteachers. In
Sverdlovsk one case involved thirty secondary schoolteachers and the head of the Provincial
Education Department, Perel.

[Five of them died before trial from tortures suffered during interrogation. Twenty-four died in
camps. The thirtieth, Ivan Aristaulovich Punich, returned after his release and rehabilitation. (Had he
died, we would have known nothing about the thirty, just as we know nothing about millions of
others.) And the many "witnesses" who testified against them are still there in Sverdlovsk today —
prospering, occupying responsible positions, or living on as special pensioners. Darwinian
selection!]

One of the terrible accusations against them was that they had made arrangements to have a New
Year's tree in order to burn down the school. And the club fell with the regularity of a pendulum on
the heads of the engineers — who by this time were no longer "bourgeois" but a whole Soviet
generation of engineers.

Because of an irregularity in the geological strata two mine tunnels which mine surveyor Nikolai
Merkuryevich Mikov had calculated would meet failed to do so. He got Article 58-7 — twenty years.

Six geologists (the Kotovich group) were sentenced to ten years under 58-7 "for intentionally
concealing reserves of tin ore in underground sites in anticipation of the arrival of the Germans." (In
other words, they had failed to find the deposits.)

On the heels of the main waves followed an additional, special wave — of wives and the so-called
"ChS" (Members of Families). Among them were the wives of important Party leaders and also, in
certain places, Leningrad, for example, the wives of all those who had been sentenced to "ten years
without the right to correspond" — in other words, those who were no longer among the living. The
"ChS," as a rule, all got eights — eight years. (Well, that was still less than the dispossessed kulaks
got and their children did not go to the Archipelago.)

Piles of victims! Hills of victims! A frontal assault of the NKVD on the city: In one wave, for
example, G. P. Matveyeva saw not only her husband but all three of her brothers arrested, and all in
different cases. (Of the four, three never returned.)

An electrician had a high-tension line break in his sector: 58-7 — twenty years.

A Perm worker, Novikov, was accused of planning to blow up a Kama River Bridge.

In that same city of Perm, Yuzhakov was arrested during the day, and at night they came for his
wife. They presented her with a list of names and demanded that she sign a confession that they had
all met in her house at a Menshevik-SR meeting (of course, they had not). They promised in return to
let her out to be with her three children. She signed, destroying all those listed, and, of course, she
herself remained in prison.

Nadezhda Yudenich was arrested because of her family name. True, they established, after nine
months, that she was not related to the White general, and they let her out (a mere trifle: during that
time her mother had died of worry).

The film Lenin in October was shown in Staraya Russa. Some-one present noticed the phrase in the



film, "Palchinsky must know!" Palchinsky was defending tlie Winter Palace. But we have a nurse
working here named Palchinskaya! Arrest her! They did arrest her. And it turned out that she
actually was his wife — who had hidden in the provinces following his execution.

In 1930, as small boys, the three brothers Pavel, Ivan, and Stepan Borushko came to the Soviet
Union from Poland to live with their parents. Now as young men they were arrested for PSh —
Suspicion of Espionage — and got ten years.

A streetcar motorwoman of Krasnodar was returning on foot late at night from the car depot; on the
outskirts of the city, to her misfortune, she passed some people working to free a truck that had
gotten stuck. It turned out to be full of corpses — hands and legs stuck out from beneath the canvas.
They wrote down her name and the next day she was arrested. The interrogator asked her what she
had seen. She told him truthfully. (Darwinian selection!) Anti-Soviet Agitation — ten years.

A plumber turned off the loudspeaker in his room every time the endless letters to Stalin were being
read.

[Who remembers them? They went on and on every day for hours! Stupefyingly identical! Levitan.
the announcer, probably remembers them well: he used to read them in rolling tones, with great
expression!]

His next-door neighbor denounced him. (Where, oh where, is that neighbor today?) He got SOE —
"Socially Dangerous Element" — eight years.

A half-literate stovemaker used to enjoy writing his name in his free time. This raised his self-
esteem. There was no blank paper around, so he wrote on newspapers. His neighbors found his
newspaper in the sack in the communal toilet, with pen-and-ink nourishes across the countenance of
the Father and Teacher. Anti-Soviet Agitation — ten years.

Stalin and those close to him loved their portraits and splashed them all over the newspapers and
issued them in millions of copies. The flies paid little heed to their sanctity, and it was a pity not to
make use of the paper — and how many unfortunates got a term for that!

Arrests rolled through the streets and apartment houses like an epidemic. Just as people transmit an
epidemic infection from one to another without knowing it, by such innocent means as a handshake,
a breath, handing someone something, so, too, they passed on the infection of inevitable arrest by a
handshake, by a breath, by a chance meeting on the street. For if you are destined to confess
tomorrow that you organized an underground group to poison the city's water supply, and if today I
shake hands with you on the street, that means I, too, am doomed.

Seven years earlier the city had watched while they massacred the countryside and considered it only
natural. Now the countryside might have watched them massacre the city, but the countryside itself
was too dark for that, and was still undergoing the finishing touches of its own slaughter.

The surveyor (!) Saunin got fifteen years for ... cattle plague (!) in the district and for bad harvests (!)
(and the entire leadership of the district was shot for the same reason).

The secretary of a District Party Committee went into the fields to speed up the plowing, and an old
peasant asked him whether he knew that for seven years the collective farmers had received not one
single ounce of grain in return for their "labor days" — only straw and very Uttle of that. For his
question the peasant got ASA — Anti-Soviet Agitation — ten years.

Another peasant, with six children, met a different fate. Because he had six mouths to feed he
devoted himself wholeheartedly to collective farm work, and kept hoping he would get some return



for his labor. And he did — they awarded him a decoration. They awarded it at a special assembly,
made speeches. In his reply, the peasant got carried away. He said, "Now if I could just have a sack
of flour instead of this decoration! Couldn't I somehow?" A wolflike laugh rocketed through the hall,
and the newly decorated hero went off to exile, together with all six of those dependent mouths.

Should we wrap it all up and simply say that they arrested the innocent? But we omitted saying that
the very concept of guilt had been repealed by the proletarian revolution and, at the beginning of the
thirties, was defined as rightist opportunism! So we can't even discuss these out-of-date concepts,
guilt and innocence.

The reverse wave of 1939 was an unheard-of incident in the history of the Organs, a blot on their
record! But, in fact, this reverse wave was not large; it included about 1 to 2 percent of those who
had been arrested but not yet convicted, who had not yet been sent away to far-off places and had not
yet perished. It was not large, but it was put to effective use. It was like giving back one kopeck
change from a ruble, but it was necessary in order to heap all the blame on that dirty Yezhov, to
strengthen the newcomer, Beria, and to cause the Leader himself to shine more brightly. With this
kopeck they skillfully drove the ruble right into the ground. After all, if "they had sorted things out
and freed some people" (and even the newspapers wrote intrepidly about individual cases of persons
who had been slandered), it meant that the rest of those arrested were indeed scoundrels! And those
who returned kept silent. They had signed pledges not to speak out. They were mute with terror. And
there were very few who knew even a little about the secrets of the Archipelago. The distinction was
as before: Black Marias at night and demonstrations by day.

But for that matter they soon took that kopeck back — during those same years and via those same
sections of the boundless Article 58. Well, who in 1940 noticed the wave of wives arrested for
failure to renounce their husbands? And who in Tambov remembers that during that year of peace
they arrested an entire jazz orchestra playing at the "Modem" Cinema Theatre because they all
turned out to be enemies of the people? And who noticed the thirty thousand Czechs who in 1939
fled from occupied Czechoslovakia to their Slavic kinfolk in the U.S.S.R.? It was impossible to
guarantee that a single one of them was not a spy.

They sent them all off to northern camps. (And it was out of those camps that the "Czechoslovak
Corps" materialized during the war.) And was it not, indeed, in 1939 that we reached out our helping
hands to the West Ukrainians and the West Byelorussians, and, in 1940, to the Baltic states and to
the Moldavians? It turned out that our brothers badly needed to be purged, and from them, too,
flowed waves of social prophylaxis. They took those who were too independent, too influential,
along with those who were too well-to-do, too intelligent, too noteworthy; they took, particularly,
many Poles from former Polish provinces. (It was then that ill-fated Katyn was filled up; and then,
too, that in the northern camps they stockpiled fodder for the future army of Sikorski and Anders.)
They arrested officers everywhere. Thus the population was shaken up, forced into silence, and left
with-out any possible leaders of resistance. Thus it was that wisdom was instilled, that former ties
and former friendships were cut off.

Finland ceded its isthmus to us with zero population. Nevertheless, the removal and resettlement of
all persons with Finnish blood took place throughout Soviet Karelia and in Leningrad in 1940. We
didn't notice that wavelet: we have no Finnish blood.

In the Finnish War we undertook our first experiment in convicting our war prisoners as traitors to
the Motherland. The first such experiment in human history; and would you believe it? — we didn't
notice!

That was the rehearsal — just at that moment the war burst upon us. And with it a massive retreat. It
was essential to evacuate swiftly everyone who could be got out of the western republics that were
being abandoned to the enemy. In the rush, entire military units — regiments, antiaircraft and artillery



batteries — were left behind intact in Lithuania. But they still managed to get out several thousand
families of unreliable Lithuanians. (Four thousand of them were subsequently turned over to be
plundered by thieves in camp at Krasnoyarsk.) From June 23 on, in Latvia and Estonia, they speeded
up the arrests. But the ground was burning under them, and they were forced to leave even faster.
They forgot to take whole fortresses with them, like the one at Brest, but they did not forget to shoot
down political prisoners in the cells and courtyards of Lvov, Rovno, Tallinn, and many other
Western prisons. In the Tartu Prison they shot 192 prisoners and threw their corpses down a well.

How can one visualize it? You know nothing. The door of your cell opens, and they shoot you. You
cry out in your death agony, and there is no one to hear your cries or tell of them except the prison
stones. They say, however, that there were some who weren't successfully finished off, and we may
someday read a book about that too.

In the rear, the first wartime wave was for those spreading rumors and panic. That was the language
of a special decree, outside the Code, issued in the first days of the war.

[I myself almost felt the impact of that decree. I was standing in line at the bread store, when a
policeman called me out and took me off for the sake of his score. If it had not been for a fortunate
intervention, I might have started out in Gulag right away instead of going off to war.]

This was just a trial bloodletting in order to maintain a general state of tension. They gave everyone
ten years for it, but it was not considered part of Article 58, and therefore those few who survived the
war-time camps were amnestied in 1945.

Then there was a wave of those who failed to turn in radio receivers or radio parts. For one radio
tube found (as a result of denunciation) they gave ten years.

Then there was the wave of Germans — Germans living on the Volga, colonists in the Ukraine and
the North Caucasus, and all Germans in general who lived anywhere in the Soviet Union. The
determining factor here was blood, and even heroes of the Civil War and old members of the Party
who were German were sent off into exile.

[They judged blood by family name. The design engineer Vasily Okorokov had found it
inconvenient to sign his drawings with his real name. Consequently, in the thirties, when it was still
legally possible, he had changed his name to Robert Shtekker. It was elegant, and he was able to
work up a good-looking professional signature with it. Now he was arrested as a German — and given
no chance to prove he was not. So he was exiled. "Is this your real name? What assignments were
you given by the Fascist intelligence service?" Then there was that native of Tambov whose real
name was Kaverznev, and who changed it to Kolbe in 1918. At what point did he share Okorokov's
fate?]

In essence, the exile of the Germans was similar to the dispossession of the kulaks. But it was less
harsh, since the Germans were allowed to take more of their possessions with them and were not sent
off to such fatal, deadly areas. As had been the case with the kulaks, the German exile had no
juridical basis. The Criminal Code in itself was one thing, and the exile of hundreds of thousands of
people was something else entirely. It was the personal edict of a monarch. In addition, this was his
first experiment of the sort with an entire nationality, and he found it extremely interesting from a
theoretical point of view.

By the end of the summer of 1941, becoming bigger in the autumn, the wave of the encircled was
surging in. These were the defenders of their native land, the very same warriors whom the cities had
seen off to the front with bouquets and bands a few months before, who had then sustained the
heaviest tank assaults of the Germans, and in the general chaos, and through no fault of their own,
had spent a certain time as isolated units not in enemy imprisonment, not at all, but in temporary



encirclement, and later had broken out. And instead of being given a brotherly embrace on their
return, such as every other army in the world would have given them, instead of being given a
chance to rest up, to visit their families, and then return to their units — they were held on suspicion,
disarmed, deprived of all rights, and taken away in groups to identification points and screening
centers where officers of the Special Branches started interrogating them, distrusting not only their
every word but their very identity. Identification consisted of cross-questioning, confrontations,
pitting the evidence of one against another. Afterward, some of those who had been encircled were
restored to their former names, ranks, and responsibilities and went off to military units. Others,
fewer in number at the start, constituted the first wave of traitors of the Motherland under 58- lb. But
at first, until the standard penalty was finally determined, they got less than ten years.

That was how the active army was kept purged. But there was also an enormous inactive army in the
Far East and in Mongolia,

and it was the noble task of the Special Branches to keep that army from growing rusty. And for lack
of anything to do, the heroes of Khalkhin-Gol and Khasan began to let their tongues wag, especially
after they were permitted to examine the Degtyarev automatic pistols and the regimental mortars,
which until then had been kept secret even from Soviet soldiers. With such weapons in their hands, it
was hard for them to understand why we were retreating in the west. With all Siberia and the Urals
between them and European Russia, it was not easy for them to grasp that in retreating seventy miles
a day we were simply repeating the Kutuzov entrapment maneuver. Their comprehension could be
helped along only by means of a wave from the Eastern Army. And at that point lips tightened and
faith became steely.

It was obvious that a wave had also to roll in high places — of those to blame for the retreat. (After
all, it was not the Great Strategist who was at fault!) It was a small wave, just half a hundred men, a
generals' wave. They were in Moscow prisons by the summer of 1941, and in October, 1941, they
were sent off on a prisoner transport. Most of the generals were from the air force; among them were
Air Force Commander Smushkevich and General Ptukhin, who was known to have said: "If I had
known, I would have first bombed our Dear Father, and then gone off to prison!" And there were
others.

The victory outside Moscow gave rise to a new wave: guilty Muscovites. Looking at things after the
event, it turned out that those Muscovites who had not run away and who had not been evacuated but
had fearlessly remained in the threatened capital, which had been abandoned by the authorities, were
by that very token under suspicion either of subverting governmental authority (58-10); or of staying
on to await the Germans (58-la, via 19, a wave which kept on providing fodder for the interrogators
of Moscow and Leningrad right up to 1945).

It need hardly be said that 58-10, ASA — Anti-Soviet Agitation — never let up but hovered over the
front and in the rear throughout the war. Sentences under 58-10 were handed out to evacuees who
talked about the horrors of the retreat (it was clear from the newspapers that the retreat was
proceeding according to plan); to those in the rear who were guilty of the slanderous rumor that
rations were meager; to those at the front who were guilty of the slanderous rumor that the Germans
had excellent equipment; and to those everywhere who, in 1942, were guilty of the slanderous rumor
that people were dying of starvation in blockaded Leningrad.

During that same year, after the disasters at Kerch (120,000 prisoners), at Kharkov (even more), and
in the course of the big southern retreat to the Caucasus and the Volga, another very important wave
of officers and soldiers was pumped through — those who refused to stand to the death and who
retreated without permission, the men whom, in the words of Stalin's immortal Order No. 227, the
Motherland could not forgive for the shame they had caused her. This wave, however, never reached
Gulag: after accelerated processing by divisional tribunals, it was, to a man, herded into punishment
battalions, and was soaked up in the red sand of advanced positions, leaving not a trace. Thus was



cemented the foundation of the StaUngrad victory, but it has found no place in the usual Russian
history and exists only in the private history of the sewage system.

(Incidentally, we are here trying to identify only those waves which came into Gulag from outside.
There was, after all, an incessant internal recirculation from reservoir to reservoir, through the
system of so-called sentencing in camp, which was particularly rampant during the war years. But
we are not considering those in this chapter.)

Conscientiousness requires that we recall also the reverse waves of wartime: the previously
mentioned Czechs and Poles who were released; as well as criminals released for service at the front.

From 1943 on, when the war turned in our favor, there began the multimilUon wave from the
occupied territories and from Europe, which got larger every year up to 1946. Its two main divisions
were:

• Civilians who had lived under the Germans or among Germans — hung with a tenner under the
letter "a": 58-la.

• Military personnel who had been POW's — who were nailed with a tenner under the letter "b": 58-
Ib.

Everyone living under the occupation wanted, of course, to survive, and therefore could not remain
with hands folded, and thereby theoretically earned, along with his daily bread, a future sentence — if
not for treason to the Motherland, then at least for aiding and abetting the enemy. However, in actual
practice, it was enough to note in the passport serial number that a person had been in occupied
territory. To arrest all such persons would have been, from the economic point of view, irrational,
because it would have depopulated such enormous areas. All that was required in order to heighten
the general consciousness was to arrest a certain percentage — of those guilty, those half-guilty, those
quarter-guilty, and those who had hung out their footcloths to dry on the same branch as the
Germans.

After all, even one percent of just one million fills up a dozen full-blooded camps.

And dismiss the thought that honorable participation in an underground anti-German organization
would surely protect one from being arrested in this wave. More than one case proved this. For
instance, there was the Kiev Komsomol member whom the underground organization sent to serve
in the Kiev police during the German occupation in order to obtain inside information. The boy kept
the Komsomol honestly informed about everything, but when our forces arrived on the scene, he got
his tenner because he couldn't, while serving in the police, fail to acquire some of the enemy's spirit
or to carry out some enemy orders.

Those who were in Europe got the stiffest punishments of all, even though they went there as
conscripted German slaves. That was because they had seen something of European life and could
talk about it. And their stories, which made unpleasant listening for us (except, of course, for the
travel notes of sensible writers), were especially unpleasant during the postwar years of ruin and
disorganization; not everyone, after all, was able to report that things in Europe were hopelessly bad
and that it was absolutely impossible to live there.

That also was the reason why they sentenced the majority of war prisoners (it was not simply
because they had allowed themselves to be captured), particularly those POW's who had seen a little
more of the West than a German death camp.

[That was not such a clear-cut decision at the start. Even in 1943 there were certain separate waves
which were like no others — like the so-called "Africans," who bore this nickname for a long time at



the Vorkuta construction projects. These were Russian war prisoners of the Germans, who had been
taken prisoner a second time when the Americans captured them from Rommel's army in Africa (the
"Hiwi"). In 1943 they were sent in Studebakers, through Egypt, Iraq, and Iran, to their Motherland.
And on a desert gulf of the Caspian, they were immediately put behind barbed wire. The police who
received them ripped off their military insignia and liberated them of all things the Americans had
given them (keeping them for themselves, of course, not turning them over to the state); then they
sent them off to Vorkuta to await special orders, without (due to inexperience) sentencing them to a
specific term under any article of the Code. These "Africans" lived in Vorkuta in a betwixt-and-
between condition. They were not under guard, but they were given no passes, and without passes
they could not take so much as one step in Vorkuta. They were paid wages at the same rate as free
workers, but they were treated like prisoners. And the special orders never did come. They were
forgotten men.]

This was obvious from the fact that interned persons were sentenced as severely as POW's. For
example, during the first days of the war one of our destroyers went aground on Swedish territory.
Its crew proceeded to live freely in Sweden during all the rest of the war, and in such comfort and
plenty as they had never experienced before and would never experience again. The U.S.S.R.
retreated, attacked, starved and died, while those scoundrels stuffed their neutral mugs. After the war
Sweden returned them to us along with the destroyer. Their treason to the Motherland was
indubitable — but somehow the case didn't get off the ground. They let them go their different ways
and then pasted them with Anti-Soviet Agitation for their lovely stories in praise of freedom and
good eating in capitalist Sweden. (This was the Kadenko group.)

[What happened to this group later makes an anecdote. In camp they kept their mouths shut about
Sweden, fearing they'd get a second term. But people in Sweden somehow found out about their fate
and published slanderous reports in the press. By that time the boys were scattered far and near
among various camps. Suddenly, on the strength of special orders, they were all yanked out and
taken to the Kresty Prison in Leningrad. There they were fed for two months as though for slaughter
and allowed to let their hair grow. Then they were dressed with modest elegance, rehearsed on what
to say and to whom, and warned that any bastard who dared to squeak out of turn would get a bullet
in his skull — and they were led off to a press conference for selected foreign journalists and some
others who had known the entire crew in Sweden.

The former internees bore themselves cheerfully, described where they were living, studying, and
working, and expressed their indignation at the bourgeois slander they had read about not long
before in the Western press (after all, Western papers are sold in the Soviet Union at every comer
newsstand!). And so they had written to one another and decided to gather in Leningrad. (Their
travel expenses didn't bother them in the least.) Their fresh, shiny appearance completely gave the lie
to the newspaper canard. The discredited journalists went off to write their apologies. It was wholly
inconceivable to the Western imagination that there could be any other explanation. And the men
who had been the subjects of the interview were taken off to a bath, had their hair cut off again, were
dressed in their former rags, and sent back to the same camps. But because they had conducted
themselves properly, none of them was given a second term.]

Within the over-all wave of those from formerly occupied areas, there followed, one after another,
the quick and compact waves of the nationalities which had transgressed:

• In 1943, the Kalmyks, Chechens, Ingush, and Balkars.

• In 1944, the Crimean Tatars.

They would not have been pushed out into eternal exile so energetically and swiftly had it not been
that regular army units and military trucks were assigned to help the Organs. The military units
gallantly surrounded the auls, or settlements, and, within twenty-four hours, with the speed of a



parachute attack, those who had nested there for centuries past found themselves removed to railroad
stations, loaded by the trainload, and rushed off to Siberia, Kazakhstan, Central Asia, and the
Russian North. Within one day their land and their property had been turned over to their "heirs."

What had happened to the Germans at the beginning of the war now happened to these nationalities:
they were exiled solely on the basis of blood. There was no filling out of questionnaires; Party
members, Heroes of Labor, and heroes of the still-unfinished war were all sent along with the rest.

During the last years of the war, of course, there was a wave of German war criminals who were
selected from the POW camps and transferred by court verdict to the jurisdiction of Gulag.

In 1945, even though the war with Japan didn't last three weeks, great numbers of Japanese war
prisoners were raked in for urgent construction projects in Siberia and Central Asia, and the same
process of selecting war criminals for Gulag was carried out among them.

[Without knowing the details, I am nevertheless convinced that a great many of these Japanese could
not have been sentenced legitimately. It was an act of revenge, as well as a means of holding onto
manpower for as long a period as possible.]

At the end of 1944, when our army entered the Balkans, and especially in 1945, when it reached into
Central Europe, a wave of Russian emigres flowed through the channels of Gulag. Most were old
men, who had left at the time of the Revolution, but there were also young people, who had grown
up outside Russia. They usually dragged off the menfolk and left the women and children where they
were. It is true that they did not take everyone, but they took all those who, in the course of twenty-
five years, had expressed even the mildest political views, or who had expressed them earlier, during
the Revolution. They did not touch those who had lived a purely vegetable existence. The main
waves came from Bulgaria, Yugoslavia, and Czechoslovakia; there were fewer from Austria and
Germany. In the other countries of Eastern Europe, there were hardly any Russians.

As if in response to 1945, a wave of emigres poured from Manchuria too. (Some of them were not
arrested immediately. Entire families were encouraged to return to the homeland as free persons, but
once back in Russia they were separated and sent into exile or taken to prison.)

All during 1945 and 1946 a big wave of genuine, at-long-last, enemies of the Soviet government
flowed into the Archipelago.

(These were the Vlasov men, the Krasnov Cossacks, and Moslems from the national units created
under Hitler.) Some of them had acted out of conviction; others had been merely involuntary
participants.

Along with them were seized not less than one million fugitives from the Soviet government —
civilians of all ages and of both sexes who had been fortunate enough to find shelter on Allied
territory, but who in 1946-1947 were perfidiously returned by Allied authorities into Soviet hands.

[It is surprising that in the West, where political secrets cannot be kept long, since they inevitably
come out in print or are disclosed, the secret of this particular act of betrayal has been very well and
carefully kept by the British and American governments. This is truly the last secret, or one of the
last, of the Second World War. Having often encountered these people in camps, I was unable to
believe for a whole quarter-century that the public in the West knew nothing of this action of the
Western governments, this massive handing over of ordinary Russian people to retribution and
death. Not until 1973 — in the Sunday Oklahoman of January 21 — was an article by Julius Epstein
published. And I am here going to be so bold as to express gratitude on behalf of the mass of those
who perished and those few left alive. One random little document was published from the many
volumes of the hitherto concealed case history of forced repatriation to the Soviet Union. "After



having remained unmolested in British hands for two years, they had allowed themselves to be lulled
into a false sense of security and they were therefore taken completely by surprise. . . . They did not
realize they were being re- patriated. . . . They were mainly simple peasants with bitter personal
grievances against the Bolsheviks." The English authorities gave them the treatment "reserved in the
case of every other nation for war criminals alone: that of being handed over against their will to
captors who, incidentally, were not expected to give them a fair trial." They were all sent to
destruction on the Archipelago. (Author's note, dated 1973.)]

A certain number of Poles, members of the Home Army, followers of Mikolajczyk, arrived in Gulag
in 1945 via our prisons.

There were a certain number of Rumanians and Hungarians.

At war's end and for many years after, there flowed uninterruptedly an abundant wave of Ukrainian
nationalists (the "Banderovtsy").

Against the background of this enormous postwar displacement of millions, few paid much attention
to such small waves as:

• Foreigners' girlfriends (in 1946-1947) — in other words, Soviet girls who went out with foreigners.
They sentenced these girls under Article 7-35 — SOE — Socially Dangerous Element.

• Spanish children — the same children who had been taken from their homeland during the Spanish
Civil War, but who were adults by the end of World War 11. Raised in our boarding schools, they
nonetheless fitted very poorly into our life.

Many longed to go "home." They, too, were given 7-35 — SOE — Socially Dangerous Element. And
those who were particularly stubborn got 58-6 — espionage on behalf of America.

(In fairness we must not forget the brief reverse wave of priests in 1947. Yes, a miracle! For the first
time in thirty years they freed priests! They didn't actually go about seeking them out in camps, but
whenever a priest was known to people in freedom, and whenever a name and exact location could
be provided, the individual priests in question were sent out to freedom in order to strengthen the
church, which at that time was being revived.)

We have to remind our readers once again that this chapter does not attempt by any means to list all
the waves which fertilized Gulag — but only those which had a political coloration. And just as, in a
course in physiology, after a detailed description of the circulation of the blood, one can begin over
again and describe in detail the lymphatic system, one could begin again and describe the waves of
nonpolitical offenders and habitual criminals from 1918 to 1953. And this description, too, would
run long.

It would bring to light many famous decrees, now in part forgotten (even though they have never
been repealed), which supplied abundant human material for the insatiable Archipelago. One was the
Decree on Absenteeism. One was the Decree on Production of Bad Quality Goods. Another was on
samogon [moonshine] distilling. Its peak period was 1922 — but arrests for this were constant
throughout the twenties. And the Decree on the Punishment of Collective Farmers for Failure to
Fulfill the Obligatory Norm of Labor Days. And the Decree on the Introduction of Military
Discipline on Railroads, issued in April, 1943 — not at the beginning of the war, but when it had
already taken a turn for the better.

In accordance with the ancient Petrine tradition, these decrees always put in an appearance as the
most important element in all our legislation, but without any comprehension of or reference to the
whole of our previous legislation. Learned jurists were supposed to coordinate the branches of the



law, but they were not particularly energetic at it, nor particularly successful either.

This steady pulse of decrees led to a curious national pattern of violations and crimes. One could
easily recognize that neither burglary, nor murder, nor samogon distilling, nor rape ever seemed to
occur at random intervals or in random places through-out the country as a result of human
weakness, lust, or failure to control one's passions. By no means! One detected, instead, a surprising
unanimity and monotony in the crimes committed. The entire Soviet Union would be in a turmoil of
rape alone, or murder alone, or samogon distilling alone, each in its turn — in sensitive reaction to the
latest government decree. Each particular crime or violation seemed somehow to be playing into the
hands of the latest decree so that it would disappear from the scene that much faster! At that precise
moment, the particular crime which had just been foreseen, and for which wise new legislation had
just provided stricter punishment, would explode simultaneously everywhere.

The Decree on the militarization of railroads crowded the military tribunals with the women and
adolescents who did most of the work on the railroads during the war years and who, having
received no barracks training beforehand, were those mostly involved in delays and violations. The
Decree on Failure to Fulfill the Obligatory Norm of Labor Days greatly simplified the procedure for
removing from the scene those collective farmers who were dissatisfied with receiving for their labor
mere "labor day" points in the farm account books and wanted produce instead. Whereas previously
their cases had required a trial, based on the article of the Code relating to "economic
counterrevolution," now it was enough to produce a collective farm decree confirmed by the District
Executive Committee. And even then these collective farmers, although they were sent into exile,
must have been relieved to know that they were not listed as enemies of the people. The obligatory
norm of "labor days" was different in different areas, the easiest of all being among the peoples of
the Caucasus — seventy-five "labor days" a year; but despite that, many of them were also sent off to
Krasnoyarsk Province for eight years.

As we have said, we are not going to go into a lengthy and lavish examination of the waves of
nonpolitical offenders and common criminals. But, having reached 1947, we cannot remain silent
about one of the most grandiose of Stalin's decrees. We have already mentioned the famous law of
"Seven-Eight" or "Seven-eighths," on the basis of which they arrested people right and left — for
taking a stalk of grain, a cucumber, two small potatoes, a chip of wood, a spool of thread — all of
whom got ten years.

[In the actual documents of the "spool of thread" case, they wrote down "200 meters of sewing
material." The fact remains that they were ashamed to write "a spool of thread."]

But the requirements of the times, as Stalin understood them, had changed, and the tenner, which
had seemed adequate on the eve of a terrible war, seemed now, in the wake of a world-wide
historical victory, inadequate. And so again, in complete disregard of the Code, and totally
overlooking the fact that many different articles and decrees on the subject of thefts and robberies
already existed, on June 4, 1947, a decree was issued which outdid them all. It was instantly
christened "Four-sixths" by the undismayed prisoners.

The advantages of the new decree lay first of all in its newness. From the very moment it appeared, a
torrent of the crimes it specified would be bound to burst forth, thereby providing an abundant wave
of newly sentenced prisoners. But it offered an even greater advantage in prison terms. If a young
girl sent into the fields to get a few ears of grain took along two friends for company ("an organized
gang") or some twelve-year-old youngsters went after cucumbers or apples, they were liable to get
twenty years in camp. In factories, the maximum sentence was raised to twenty-five years. (This
sentence, called the quarter, had been introduced a few days earlier to replace the death penalty,
which had been abolished as a humane act.)

[And the death penalty itself was kept veiled for a brief period only; the veil was removed, amid a



show of bared fangs, two and a half years later — in January, 1950.]

And then, at long last, an ancient shortcoming of the law was corrected. Previously the only failure
to make a denunciation which qualified as a crime against the state had been in connection with
political offenses. But now simple failure to report the theft of state or collective farm property
earned three years of camp or seven years of exile.

In the years immediately following this decree, whole "divisions" from the countryside and the cities
were sent off to cultivate the islands of Gulag in place of the natives who had died off there. True,
these waves were processed through the police and the ordinary courts, and did not clog the channels
of State Security, which, even without them, were overstrained in the postwar years.

Stalin's new Une, suggesting that it was necessary, in the wake of the victory over fascism, to jail
more people more energetically and for longer terms than ever before, had immediate repercussions,
of course, on political prisoners.

The year 1948-1949, notable throughout Soviet public life for intensified persecution and vigilance,
was marked by one tragicomedy hitherto unheard of even in Stalinist antijustice — that of the

repeaters.

That is what, in the language of Gulag, they called those still undestroyed unfortunates of 1937
vintage, who had succeeded in surviving ten impossible, unendurable years, and who in 1947-1948,
had timidly stepped forth onto the land of freedom . . .worn out, broken in health, but hoping to live
out in peace what little of their lives remained. But some sort of savage fantasy (or stubborn malice,
or unsated vengeance) pushed the Victorious Generalissimo into issuing the order to arrest all those
cripples over again, without any new charges! It was even disadvantageous, both economically and
politically, to clog the meat grinder with its own refuse. But Stalin issued the order anyway. Here
was a case in which a historical personality simply behaved capriciously toward historical necessity.

And so it was necessary to take all of them though they had hardly had a chance to attach themselves
to new places or new families. They were rounded up with much the same weary indolence they
themselves now returned with. They knew beforehand the whole way of the cross ahead. They did
not ask "What for?" And they did not say to their families: "I'll be back." They put on their shabbiest
rags, poured some makhorka into their camp tobacco pouches, and went off to sign the deposition.
(Only one question: "Are you the one who was in prison?" "Yes." "Take ten more.")

At this point the Autocrat decided it wasn't enough to arrest just those who had survived since 1937!
What about the children of his sworn enemies? They, too, must be imprisoned! They were growing
up, and they might have notions of vengeance. (He may have had a heavy dinner and had a
nightmare about those children. ) They went through the lists, looked around, and arrested
children — but not very many. They arrested the children of the purged army commanders, but not all
the children of Trotskyites. And so the wave of the vengeful children came into being.

(Among such children were seventeen-year-old Lena Kosaryeva and thirty-five-year-old Yelena
Rakovskaya.)

By 1948, after the great European displacement, Stalin had succeeded once again in tightly
barricading himself in and pulling the ceiling down closer to him: in this reduced space he had
recreated the tension of 1937.

And so in 1948, 1949, and 1950 there flowed past:

• Alleged spies (ten years earlier they had been German and Japanese, now they were Anglo-
American).



• Believers (this wave non-Orthodox for the most part).

• Those geneticists and plant breeders, disciples of the late Vavilov and of Mendel, who had not
previously been arrested.

• Just plain ordinary thinking people (and students, with particular severity) who had not been
sufficiently scared away from the West. It was fashionable to charge them with:

• VAT — Praise of American Technology;

• VAD — Praise of American Democracy; and

• PZ — Toadyism Toward the West.

These waves were not unlike those of 1937, but the sentences were different. The standard sentence
was no longer the patriarchal ten-ruble bill, but the new Stalinist twenty-five. By now the tenner was
for juveniles.

There was a good- sized wave from the new Decree on Revealing State Secrets. (State secrets
included such things as: the district harvest; any figure on epidemics; the type of goods produced by
any workshop or mini-factory; mention of a civil airport, municipal transport routes, or the family
name of any prisoner imprisoned in any camp.) For violations of this decree they gave fifteen years.

The waves of nationalities were not forgotten either. The Ukrainian nationalists, the "Banderovtsy,"
taken in the heat of struggle from the forests where they fought, kept flowing all this time.
Simultaneously, all West Ukrainian country people received tenners and//ver5 in camps and exile —
presumably for having had connections with the partisans: someone had let them spend the night;
someone had once fed them; someone had not reported them. For about a year, starting in 1950, a
wave of wives of Banderovtsy was under way. They gave them each ten years for failure to make a
denunciation — so as to finish off their husbands faster.

By this time resistance in Lithuania and Estonia had already come to an end. But in 1949 new waves
of new "social prophylaxis" to assure collectivization kept coming. They took whole trainloads of

city dwellers and peasants from the three Baltic republics into Siberian exile. (The historical rhythm
was disrupted in these republics: they were forced to recapitulate in brief, limited periods the more
extended experience of the rest of the country.)

In 1948 one more nationalist wave went into exile — that of the Greeks who inhabited the areas
around the Sea of Azov, the Kuban, and Sukhumi. They had done nothing to offend the Father
during the war, but now he avenged himself on them for his failure in Greece, or so it seemed. This
wave, too, was evidently the fruit of his personal insanity. The majority of the Greeks ended up in
Central Asian exile; those who voiced their discontent were thrown into political prisons.

Around 1950, to avenge the same lost war, or perhaps just to balance those already in exile, the
Greek rebels from Markos' army, who had been turned over to us by Bulgaria, were themselves
shipped off to the Archipelago.

During the last years of Stalin's life, a wave of Jews became noticeable. (From 1950 on they were
hauled in little by little as cosmopolites. And that was why the doctors' case was cooked up. It would
appear that Stalin intended to arrange a great massacre of the Jews.)

[It has always been impossible to learn the truth about anything in our country — now, and always,
and from the beginning. But, according to Moscow rumors, Stalin's plan was this: At the beginning
of March the "doctor-murderers" were to be hanged on Red Square. The aroused patriots, spurred on.



naturally, by instructors, were to rush into an anti- Jewish pogrom. At this point the government —
and here Stalin's character can be divined, can it not? — would intervene generously to save the Jews
from the wrath of the people, and that same night would remove them from Moscow to the Far East
and Siberia — where barracks had already been prepared for them.]

But this became the first plan of his life to fail. God told him — apparently with the help of human
hands — to depart from his rib cage.

The preceding exposition should have made it clear, one would think, that in the removal of millions
and in the populating of Gulag, consistent, cold-blooded planning and never-weakening persistence
were at work.

That we never did have any empty prisons, merely prisons which were full or prisons which were
very, very overcrowded.

And that while you occupied yourself to your heart's content studying the safe secrets of the atomic
nucleus, researching the influence of Heidegger on Sartre, or collecting Picasso reproductions; while
you rode off in your railroad sleeping compartment to vacation resorts, or finished building your
country house near Moscow — the Black Marias rolled incessantly through the streets and the
gaybisty — the State Security men — knocked at doors and rang doorbells.

And I think this exposition proves that the Organs always earned their pay.

Chapter 3

The Interrogation

If the intellectuals in the plays of Chekhov who spent all their time guessing what would happen in
twenty, thirty, or forty years had been told that in forty years interrogation by torture would be
practiced in Russia; that prisoners would have their skulls squeezed within iron rings; that a human
being would be lowered into an acid bath; that they would be trussed up naked to be bitten by ants
and bedbugs; that a ramrod heated over a primus stove would be thrust up their anal canal (the
"secret brand"); that a man's genitals would be slowly crushed beneath the toe of a jackboot; and
that, in the luckiest possible circumstances, prisoners would be tortured by being kept from sleeping
for a week, by thirst, and by being beaten to a bloody pulp, not one of Chekhov's plays would have
gotten to its end because all the heroes would have gone off to insane asylums.

Yes, not only Chekhov's heroes, but what normal Russian at the beginning of the century, including
any member of the Russian Social Democratic Workers' Party, could have believed, would have
tolerated, such a slander against the bright future? What had been acceptable under Tsar Aleksei
Mikhailovich in the seventeenth century, what had already been regarded as barbarism under Peter
the Great, what might have been used against ten or twenty people in all during the time of Biron in
the mid-eighteenth century, what had already become totally impossible under Catherine the Great,
was all being practiced during the flowering of the glorious twentieth century — in a society based on
socialist principles, and at a time when airplanes were flying and the radio and talking films had
already appeared — not by one scoundrel alone in one secret place only, but by tens of thousands of
specially trained human beasts standing over millions of defenseless victims.

Was it only that explosion of atavism which is now evasively called "the cult of personality" that
was so horrible? Or was it even more horrible that during those same years, in 1937 itself, we
celebrated Pushkin's centennial? And that we shamelessly continued to stage those self-same
Chekhov plays, even though the answers to them had already come in? Is it not still more dreadful
that we are now being told, thirty years later, "Don't talk about it!"? If we start to recall the sufferings
of millions, we are told it will distort the historical perspective! If we doggedly seek out the essence



of our morality, we are told it will darken our material progress! Let's think rather about the blast
furnaces, the rolling mills that were built, the canals that were dug ... no, better not talk about the
canals. . . . Then maybe about the gold of the Kolyma? No, maybe we ought not to talk about that
either. . . . Well, we can talk about anything, so long as we do it adroitly, so long as we glorify it. ...

It is really hard to see why we condemn the Inquisition. Wasn't it true that beside the autos-da-fe,
magnificent services were offered the Almighty? It is hard to see why we are so down on serfdom.
After all, no one forbade the peasants to work every day. And they could sing carols at Christmas
too. And for Trinity Day the girls wove wreaths. . . .

The exceptional character which written and oral legend nowadays assigns to the year 1937 is seen
in the creation of fabricated charges and tortures. But this is untrue, wrong. Throughout the years and
decades, interrogations under Article 58 were almost never undertaken to elicit the truth, but were
simply an exercise in an inevitably filthy procedure: someone who had been free only a little while
before, who was sometimes proud and always unprepared, was to be bent and pushed through a
narrow pipe where his sides would be torn by iron hooks and where he could not breathe, so that he
would finally pray to get to the other end. And at the other end, he would be shoved out, an already
processed native of the Archipelago, already in the promised land. (The fool would keep on
resisting! He even thought there was a way back out of the pipe.)

The more time that passes without anything being written about all this, the harder it becomes to
assemble the scattered testimony of the survivors. But they tell us that the creation of fabricated
cases began back in the early years of the Organs so their constant salutary activity might be
perceived as essential. Otherwise, what with a decline in the number of enemies, the Organs might,
in a bad hour, have been forced to wither away. As the case of Kosyrev makes clear, the situation of
the Cheka was shaky even at the beginning of 1919.

[Cf. Part I, Chapter 8, below.]

Reading the newspapers of 1918, 1 ran into the official report of a terrible plot that had just been
discovered: A group of ten people wanted to (it seems they only wanted to!) drag cannon onto the
roof of an orphanage (let's see — how high was it?) and shell the Kremlin. There were ten of them
(including, perhaps, women and youngsters), and it was not reported how many cannon there were to
be — nor where the cannon were to come from. Nor what caliber they were. Nor how they were to be
carried up the stairs to the attic. Nor how they were to be set up, on the steeply sloping roof, and so
they wouldn't recoil when fired! How was it that the Petersburg police, when they were fighting to
put down the February Revolution, took nothing heavier than a machine gun up to the roofs? Yet this
fantasy, exceeding even the fabrications of 1937, was read and believed! Apparently, it will be
proved to us in time that the Gumilyev case of 1921 was also fabricated.

[A. A. Akhmatova told me she was convinced that this was so. She even gave me the name of the
Chekist who cooked up the case — Y. Agranov, it seems.]

In that same year, 1921, the Ryazan Cheka fabricated a false case of a "plot" on the part of the local
intelligentsia. But the protests of courageous people could still reach Moscow, and they dropped the
case. That year, too, the whole Sapropelite Committee, part of the Commission on the Use of Natural
Forces, was shot. Familiar enough with the attitude and the mood of Russian scientists at that time,
and not being shut off from those years by a smoke screen of fanaticism, we can, indeed, figure out,
even without archaeological excavations, the precise validity of that case.

Here is what Y. Doyarenko remembers about 1921: the Lubyanka reception cell for those newly
arrested, with forty to fifty trestle beds, and women being brought in one after another all night long.
None of them knew what she was supposed to be guilty of, and there was a feeling among them that
people were being arrested for no reason at all. Only one woman in the whole cell knew why she was



there — she was an SR. The first question asked by Yagoda: "Well, what are you here for?" In other
words, you tell me, and help me cook up the case! And they say absolutely the same thing about the
Ryazan GPU in 1930! People all felt they were being imprisoned for no reason. There was so little

on which to base a charge that they accused I. D. T v of using a false name. (And even though

his name was perfectly real, they handed him three years via a Special Board — OSO — under 58-10.)
Not knowing what to pick on, the interrogator asked: "What was your job?" Answer: "A planner."
The interrogater: "Write me a statement that explains 'planning at the factory and how it is carried
out.' After that I will let you know why you've been arrested." (He expected the explanation to
provide the hook on which to hang a charge.)

Here is the way it went in the case of the Kovno Fortress in 1912: Since the fortress served no useful
military purpose, it was decided to eliminate it. At that point the fortress command, thoroughly
alarmed, arranged a "night attack" simply to prove its usefulness and in order to stay where they
were!

The theoretical view of the suspect's guilt was, incidentally, quite elastic from the very beginning. In

his instructions on the use of Red Terror, the Chekist M. 1. Latsis wrote: "In the interrogation do not
seek evidence and proof that the person accused acted in word or deed against Soviet power. The
first questions should be: What is his class, what is his origin, what is his education and upbringing?
[There is your Sapropelite Committee for you!] These are the questions which must determine the
fate of the accused." On November 13, 1920, Dzerzhinsky reported in a letter to the Cheka that
"slanderous declarations are often given the green light" in the Cheka.

After so many decades have they not taught us that people do not return ^om there? Except for the
small, brief, intentional reverse wave of 1939, one hears only the rarest, isolated stories of someone
being turned loose as the result of an interrogation. And in such cases, the person was either
imprisoned soon again or else he was let out so he could be kept under surveillance. That is how the
tradition arose that the Organs do not make mistakes. Then what about those who were innocent?

In his Dictionary of Definitions Dal makes the following distinction: "An inquiry is distinguished
from an investigation by the fact that it is carried out to determine whether there is a basis for
proceeding to an investigation."

On, sacred simplicity! The Organs have never heard of such a thing as an inquiry \ Lists of names
prepared up above, or an initial suspicion, or a denunciation by an informer, or any anonymous
denunciation, were all that was needed to bring about the arrest of the suspect, followed by the
inevitable formal charge.

[Article 93 of the Code of Criminal Procedure has this to say: "An anonymous declaration can serve
as reason for beginning a criminal case" ! (And there is no need to be surprised at the word "criminal"
here, since all "politicals" were considered criminals, too, under the Code.)]

The time allotted for investigation was not used to unravel the crime but, in ninety-five cases out of a
hundred, to exhaust, wear down, weaken, and render helpless the defendant, so that he would want it
to end at any cost.

As long ago as 1919 the chief method used by the interrogator was a revolver on the desk. That was
how they investigated not only political but also ordinary misdemeanors and violations. At the trial
of the Main Fuels Committee (1921), the accused Makhrovskaya complained that at her
interrogation she had been drugged with cocaine. The prosecutor replied: "If she had declared that
she had been treated rudely, that they had threatened to shoot her, this might be just barely
believable. " The frightening revolver lies there and sometimes it is aimed at you, and the interrogator
doesn't tire himself out thinking up what you are guilty of, but shouts: "Come on, talk! You know
what about!" That was what the interrogator Khaikin demanded of Skripnikova in 1927. That was



what they demanded of Vitkovsky in 1929. And twenty-five years later nothing had changed. In
1952 Anna Skripnikova was undergoing her fifth imprisonment, and Sivakov, Chief of the
Investigative Department of the Ordzhonikidze State Security Administration, said to her: "The
prison doctor reports you have a blood pressure of 240/120. That's too low, you bitch! We're going to
drive it up to 340 so you'll kick the bucket, you viper, and with no black and blue marks; no
beatings; no broken bones. We'll just not let you sleep." She was in her fifties at the time. And if,
back in her cell, after a night spent in interrogation, she closed her eyes during the day, the jailer
broke in and shouted: "Open your eyes or I'll haul you off that cot by the legs and tie you to the wall
standing up."

As early as 1921 interrogations usually took place at night. At that time, too, they shone automobile
lights in the prisoner's face (the Ryazan Cheka — Stelmakh). And at the Lubyanka in 1926 (according
to the testimony of Berta Gandal) they made use of the hot-air heating system to fill the cell first
with icy-cold and then with stinking hot air. And there was an airtight cork-lined cell in which there
was no ventilation and they cooked the prisoners. The poet Klyuyev was apparently confined in such
a cell and Berta Gandal also. A participant in the Yaroslavl uprising of 1918, Vasily Aleksandrovich
Kasyanov, described how the heat in such a cell was turned up until your blood began to ooze
through your pores. When they saw this happening through the peephole, they would put the
prisoner on a stretcher and take him off to sign his confession. The "hot" and "salty" methods of the
"gold" period are well known. And in Georgia in 1926 they used lighted cigarettes to burn the hands
of prisoners under interrogation. In Metekhi Prison they pushed prisoners into a cesspool in the dark.

There is a very simple connection here. Once it was established that charges had to be brought at any
cost and despite everything, threats, violence, tortures became inevitable. And the more fantastic the
charges were, the more ferocious the interrogation had to be in order to force the required
confession. Given the fact that the cases were always fabricated, violence and torture had to
accompany them. This was not peculiar to 1937 alone. It was a chronic, general practice. And that is
why it seems strange today to read in the recollections of former zeks that "torture was permitted
from the spring of 1938 on."

[Y. Ginzburg writes that permission for "physical measures of persuasion" was given in April, 1938.
V. Shalamov believes that tortures were permitted from the middle of 1938 on. The old prisoner M~
— ch is convinced that there was an "order to simplify the questioning and to change from
psychological methods to physical methods." Ivanov-Razumnik singles out the middle of 1938 as the
"period of the most cruel interrogations."]

There were never any spiritual or moral barriers which could have held the Organs back from
torture. In the early postwar years, in the Cheka Weekly, The Red Sword, and Red Terror, the
admissibility of torture from a Marxist point of view was openly debated. Judging by the subsequent
course of events, the answer deduced was positive, though not universally so.

It is more accurate to say that if before 1938 some kind of formal documentation was required as a
preliminary to torture, as well as specific permission for each case under investigation (even though
such permission was easy to obtain), then in the years 1937-1938, in view of the extraordinary
situation prevailing (the specified millions of admissions to the Archipelago had to be ground
through the apparatus of individual interrogation in specified, limited periods, something which had
simply not happened in the mass waves of kulaks and nationalities), interrogators were allowed to
use violence and torture on an unlimited basis, at their own discretion, and in accordance with the
demands of their work quotas and the amount of time they were given. The types of torture used
were not regulated and every kind of ingenuity was permitted, no matter what.

In 1939 such indiscriminate authorization was withdrawn, and once again written permission was
required for torture, and perhaps it may not have been so easily granted. (Of course, simple threats,
blackmail, deception, exhaustion through enforced sleeplessness, and punishment cells were never



prohibited.) Then, from the end of the war and throughout the postwar years, certain categories of
prisoners were established by decree for whom a broad range of torture was automatically permitted.
Among these were nationalists, particularly the Ukrainians and the Lithuanians, especially in those
cases where an underground organization existed (or was suspected) that had to be completely
uncovered, which meant obtaining the names of everyone involved from those already arrested. For
example, there were about fifty Lithuanians in the group of Romualdas Skyrius, the son of Pranus. In
1945 they were charged with posting anti-Soviet leaflets. Because there weren't enough prisons in
Lithuania at the time, they sent them to a camp near Velsk in Archangel Province. There some were
tortured and others simply couldn't endure the double regime of work plus interrogation, with the
result that all fifty, to the very last one, confessed. After a short time news came from Lithuania that
the real culprits responsible for the leaflets had been discovered, and none of the first group had been
involved at alUln 1950, at the Kuibyshev Transit Prison, I encountered a Ukrainian from
Dnepropetrovsk who had been tortured many different ways in an effort to squeeze "contacts" and
names out of him. Among the tortures to which he had been subjected was a punishment cell in
which there was room only to stand. They shoved a pole inside for him to hold on to so that he could
sleep — for four hours a day. After the war, they tortured Corresponding Member of the Academy of
Sciences Levina because she and the AUiluyevs had acquaintances in common.

It would also be incorrect to ascribe to 1937 the "discovery" that the personal confession of an
accused person was more important than any other kind of proof or facts. This concept had already
been formulated in the twenties. And 1937 was just the year when the brilliant teaching of
Vyshinsky came into its own. Incidentally, even at that time, his teaching was transmitted only to
interrogators and prosecutors — for the sake of their morale and steadfastness. The rest of us only
learned about it twenty years later — when it had already come into disfavor — through subordinate
clauses and minor paragraphs of newspaper articles, which treated the subject as if it had long been
widely known to all.

It turns out that in that terrible year Andrei Yanuaryevich (one longs to blurt out, "Jaguaryevich")
Vyshinsky, availing himself of the most flexible dialectics (of a sort nowadays not permitted either
Soviet citizens or electronic calculators, since to them yes is yes and no is no), pointed out in a report
which became famous in certain circles that it is never possible for mortal men to establish absolute
truth, but relative truth only. He then proceeded to a further step, which jurists of the last two
thousand years had not been willing to take: that the truth established by interrogation and trial could
not be absolute, but only, so to speak, relative. Therefore, when we sign a sentence ordering
someone to be shot we can never be absolutely certain, but only approximately, in view of certain
hypotheses, and in a certain sense, that we are punishing a guilty person.

[Perhaps Vyshinsky, no less than his listeners, needed this ideological comfort at this time. When he
cried out from the prosecutor's platform: "Shoot them all like mad dogs!" he, at least, who was both
evil and quick of mind, understood that the accused were innocent. And in all probability he and that
whale of Marxist dialectics, the defendant Bukharin, devoted themselves with all the greater passion
to the dialectical elaboration of the judicial lie: for Bukharin it was too stupid and futile to die if he
was altogether innocent (thus he needed to find his own guilt!); and for Vyshinsky it was more
agreeable to see himself as a logician than as a plain downright scoundrel. ]

Thence arose the most practical conclusion: that it was useless to seek absolute evidence — for
evidence is always relative — or unchallengeable witnesses — for they can say different things at
different times. The proofs of guilt were relative, approximate, and the interrogator could find them,
even when there was no evidence and no witness, without leaving his office, "basing his conclusions
not only on his own intellect but also on his Party sensitivity, his moral forces" (in other words, the
superiority of someone who has slept well, has been well fed, and has not been beaten up) "and on
his character" (i.e., his willingness to apply cruelty!).

Of course, this formulation was much more elegant than Latsis' instructions. But the essence of both



was the same.

In only one respect did Vyshinsky fail to be consistent and retreat from dialectical logic: for some
reason, the executioner's bullet which he allowed was not relative but absolute. . . .

Thus it was that the conclusions of advanced Soviet jurisprudence, proceeding in a spiral, returned to
barbaric or medieval standards. Like medieval torturers, our interrogators, prosecutors, and judges
agreed to accept the confession of the accused as the chief proof of guilt.

[Compare the Fifth Amendment to the Constitution of the United States: "Nor shall [any person] be
compelled in any criminal case to be a witness against himself." Not be compelled! (The same thing
appears in the seventeenth- century Bill of Rights.)]

However, the simple-minded Middle Ages used dramatic and picturesque methods to squeeze out the
desired confessions: the rack, the wheel, the bed of nails, impalement, hot coals, etc. In the twentieth
century, taking advantage of our more highly developed medical knowledge and extensive prison
experience (and someone seriously defended a doctoral dissertation on this theme), people came to
realize that the accumulation of such impressive apparatus was superfluous and that, on a mass scale,
it was also cumbersome. And in addition . . .

In addition, there was evidently one other circumstance. As always, Stalin did not pronounce that
final word, and his subordinates had to guess what he wanted. Thus, like a jackal, he left himself an
escape hole, so that he could, if he wanted, beat a retreat and write about "dizziness from success."
After all, for the first time in human history the calculated torture of millions was being undertaken,
and, even with all his strength and power, Stalin could not be absolutely sure of success. In dealing
with such an enormous mass of material, the effects of the experiment might differ from those
obtained from a smaller sample. An unforeseen explosion might take place, a slippage in a
geological fault, or even world-wide disclosure. In any case, Stalin had to remain innocent, his
sacred vestments angelically pure.

We are therefore forced to conclude that no list of tortures and torments existed in printed form for
the guidance of interrogators! Instead, all that was required was for every Interrogation Department
to supply the tribunal within a specified period with a stipulated number of rabbits who had
confessed everything. And it was simply stated, orally but often, that any measures and means
employed were good, since they were being used for a lofty purpose; that no interrogator would be
made to answer for the death of an accused; and that the prison doctor should interfere as little as
possible with the course of the investigation. In all probability, they exchanged experiences in
comradely fashion; "they learned from the most successful workers." Then, too, "material rewards"
were offered — higher pay for night work, bonus pay for fast work — and there were also definite
warnings that interrogators who could not cope with their tasks . . . Even the chief of some provincial
NKVD administration, if some sort of mess developed, could show Stalin his hands were clean: he
had issued no direct instructions to use torture! But at the same time he had ensured that torture
would be used!

Understanding that their superiors were taking precautions for self-protection, some of the rank-and-
file interrogators — not, however, those who drank like maniacs — tried to start off with milder
methods, and even when they intensified them, they tried to avoid those that left obvious marks: an
eye gouged out, an ear torn off, a backbone broken, even bruises all over the body.

That is why in 1937 we observe no general consistency of methods — except for enforced
sleeplessness — in the administrations of the various provinces, or for that matter among the different
interrogators of a single administration.

[It is common talk that Rostov-on-the-Don and Krasnodar were particularly distinguished for the



cruelty of their tortures, but this has not been proved.]

What they did have in common, however, was that they gave precedence to the so-called light
methods (we will see what they were immediately). This way was sure. Indeed, the actual boundaries
of human equilibrium are very narrow, and it is not really necessary to use a rack or hot coals to
drive the average human being out of his mind.

Let us try to list some of the simplest methods which break the will and the character of the prisoner
without leaving marks on his body.

Let us begin with psychological methods. These methods have enormous and even annihilating
impact on rabbits who have never been prepared for prison suffering. And it isn't easy even for a
person who holds strong convictions.

1. First of all: night. Why is it that all the main work of breaking down human souls went on at
night? Why, from their very earliest years, did the Organs select the night? Because at night, the
prisoner torn from sleep, even though he has not yet been tortured by sleeplessness, lacks his normal
daytime equanimity and common sense. He is more vulnerable.

2. Persuasion in a sincere tone is the very simplest method. Why play at cat and mouse, so to speak?
After all, having spent some time among others undergoing interrogation, the prisoner has come to
see what the situation is. And so the interrogator says to him in a lazily friendly way: "Look, you're
going to get a prison term whatever happens. But if you resist, you'll croak right here in prison, you'll
lose your health. But if you go to camp, you'll have fresh air and sunlight. ... So why not sign right
now?" Very logical. And those who agree and sign are smart, if ... if the matter concerns only
themselves! But that's rarely so. A struggle is inevitable.

Another variant of persuasion is particularly appropriate to the Party member. "If there are shortages
and even famine in the country, then you as a Bolshevik have to make up your mind: can you admit
that the whole Party is to blame? Or the whole Soviet government?" "No, of course not!" the director
of the flax depot hastened to reply. "Then be brave, and shoulder the blame yourself!" And he did!

3. Foul language is not a clever method, but it can have a powerful impact on people who are well
brought up, refined, delicate. I know of two cases involving priests, who capitulated to foul language
alone. One of them, in the Butyrki in 1944, was being interrogated by a woman. At first when he'd
come back to our cell he couldn't say often enough how polite she was. But once he came back very
despondent, and for a long time he refused to tell us how, with her legs crossed high, she had begun
to curse. (I regret that I cannot cite one of her little phrases here.)

4. Psychological contrast was sometimes effective: sudden reversals of tone, for example. For a
whole or part of the interrogation period, the interrogator would be extremely friendly, addressing
the prisoner formally by first name and patronymic, and promising everything. Suddenly he would
brandish a paper-weight and shout: "Foo, you rat! I'll put nine grams of lead in your skull!" And he
would advance on the accused, clutching hands outstretched as if to grab him by the hair, fingernails
like needles. (This worked very, very well with women prisoners.)

Or as a variation on this: two interrogators would take turns. One would shout and bully. The other
would be friendly, almost gentle. Each time the accused entered the office he would tremble — which
would it be? He wanted to do everything to please the gentle one because of his different manner,
even to the point of signing and confessing to things that had never happened.

5. Preliminary humiliation was another approach. In the famous cellars of the Rostov-on-the-Don

GPU (House 33), which were lit by lenslike insets of thick glass in the sidewalk above the former
storage basement, prisoners awaiting interrogation were made to lie face down for several hours in



the main corridor and forbidden to raise their heads or make a sound. They lay this way, like
Moslems at prayer, until the guard touched a shoulder and took them off to interrogation. Another

case: At the Lubyanka, Aleksandra O va refused to give the testimony demanded of her. She

was transferred to Lefortovo. In the admitting office, a woman jailer ordered her to undress,
allegedly for a medical examination, took away her clothes, and locked her in a "box" naked. At that
point the men jailers began to peer through the peephole and to appraise her female attributes with
loud laughs. If one were systematically to question former prisoners, many more such examples
would certainly emerge. They all had but a single purpose: to dishearten and humiliate.

6. Any method of inducing extreme confusion in the accused might be employed. Here is how F.I.V.

from Krasnogorsk, Moscow Province, was interrogated. (This was reported by I. A. P ev.)

During the interrogation, the interrogator, a woman, undressed in front of him by stages (a
striptease!), all the time continuing the interrogation as if nothing were going on. She walked about
the room and came close to him and tried to get him to give in. Perhaps this satisfied some personal
quirk in her, but it may also have been cold-blooded calculation, an attempt to get the accused so
muddled that he would sign. And she was in no danger. She had her pistol, and she had her alarm
bell.

7. Intimidation was very widely used and very varied. It was often accompanied by enticement and
by promises which were, of course, false. In 1924: "If you don't confess, you'll go to the Solovetsky
Islands. Anybody who confesses is turned loose." In 1944: "Which camp you'll be sent to depends on
us. Camps are different. We've got hard-labor camps now. If you confess, you'll go to an easy camp.
If you're stubborn, you'll get twenty -five years in handcuffs in the mines!" Another form of
intimidation was threatening a prisoner with a prison worse than the one he was in. "If you keep on
being stubborn, we'll send you to Lefortovo" (if you are in the Lubyanka), "to Sukhanovka" (if you
are at Lefortovo). "They'll find another way to talk to you there." You have already gotten used to
things where you are; the regimen seems to be not so bad; and what kind of torments await you
elsewhere? Yes, and you also have to be transported there. . . . Should you give in?

Intimidation worked beautifully on those who had not yet been arrested but had simply received an
official summons to the Bolshoi Dom — the Big House. He (or she) still had a lot to lose. He (or she)
was frightened of everything — that they wouldn't let him (or her) out today, that they would
confiscate his (or her) belongings or apartment. He would be ready to give all kinds of testimony and
make all kinds of concessions in order to avoid these dangers. She, of course, would be ignorant of
the Criminal Code, and, at the very least, at the start of the questioning they would push a sheet of
paper in front of her with a fake citation from the Code: "I have been warned that for giving false
testimony . . . five years of imprisonment." (In actual fact, under Article 95, it is two years.) "For
refusal to give testimony — five years ..." (In actual fact, under Article 92, it is up to three months.)
Here, then, one more of the interrogator's basic methods has entered the picture and will continue to
re-enter it.

8. The lie. We lambs were forbidden to lie, but the interrogator could tell all the lies he felt like.
Those articles of the law did not apply to him. We had even lost the yardstick with which to gauge:
what does he get for lying? He could confront us with as many documents as he chose, bearing the
forged signatures of our kinfolk and friends — and it would be just a skillful interrogation technique.

Intimidation through enticement and lies was the fundamental method for bringing pressure on the
relatives of the arrested person when they were called in to give testimony. "If you don't tell us such
and such" (whatever was being asked), "it's going to be the worse for him. . . . You'll be destroying
him completely." (How hard for a mother to hear that!)

[Under the harsh laws of the Tsarist Empire, close relatives could refuse to testify. And even if they
gave testimony at a preliminary investigation, they could choose to repudiate it and refuse to permit
it to be used in court. And, curiously enough, kinship or acquaintance with a criminal was never in



itself considered evidence.]

"Signing this paper" (pushed in front of the relatives) "is the only way you can save him" (destroy
him).

9. Playing on one's affection for those one loved was a game that worked beautifully on the accused
as well. It was the most effective of all methods of intimidation. One could break even a totally
fearless person through his concern for those he loved. (Oh, how foresighted was the saying: "A
man's family are his enemies.") Remember the Tatar who bore his sufferings — his own and those of
his wife — but could not endure his daughter's! In 1930, Rimalis, a woman interrogator, used to
threaten: "We'll arrest your daughter and lock her in a cell with syphilitics!" And that was a woman!

They would threaten to arrest everyone you loved. Sometimes this would be done with sound effects:
Your wife has already been arrested, but her further fate depends on you. They are questioning her in
the next room — just listen! And through the wall you can actually hear a woman weeping and
screaming. (After all, they all sound alike; you're hearing it through a wall; and you're under terrific
strain and not in a state to play the expert on voice identification. Sometimes they simply play a
recording of the voice of a "typical wife" — soprano or contralto — a labor-saving device suggested
by some inventive genius.) And then, without fakery, they actually show her to you through a glass
door, as she walks along in silence, her head bent in grief. Yes! Your own wife in the corridors of
State Security! You have destroyed her by your stubbornness! She has already been arrested! (In
actual fact, she has simply been summoned in connection with some insignificant procedural
question and sent into the corridor at just the right moment, after being told: "Don't raise your head,
or you'll be kept here!") Or they give you a letter to read, and the handwriting is exactly like hers: "I
renounce you! After the filth they have told me about you, I don't need you any more!" (And since
such wives do exist in our country, and such letters as well, you are left to ponder in your heart: Is
that the kind of wife she really is?)

The interrogator Goldman (in 1944) was trying to extort testimony against other people from V. A.
Korneyeva with the threat: "We'll confiscate your house and toss your old women into the street." A
woman of deep convictions, and firm in her faith, Korneyeva had no fear whatever for herself. She
was prepared to suffer. But, given our laws, Goldman's threats were all too real, and she was in
torment over the fate of her loved ones. When, by morning, after a night of tearing up rejected
depositions, Goldman began to write a fourth version accusing Korneyeva alone, she signed it
happily and with a feeling of spiritual victory. We fail to hang on to the basic human instinct to
prove our innocence when falsely accused. How can we there? We were even glad when we
succeeded in taking all the guilt on our own shoulders.

[Today she says: "After eleven years, during rehabilitation proceedings they let me reread those
'depositions,' and I was gripped by a feeling of spiritual nausea. What was there to be proud of?" I
myself, during the rehabilitation period, felt the very same way on hearing excerpts from my earlier
depositions. As the saying goes: They bent me into a bow, and I became someone else. I did not
recognize myself — how could I have signed them and still think I had not gotten off too badly?]

Just as there is no classification in nature with rigid boundaries, it is impossible rigidly to separate
psychological methods from physical ones. Where, for example, should we classify the following
amusement?

10. Sound effects: The accused is made to stand twenty to twenty-five feet away and is then forced to
speak more and more loudly and to repeat everything. This is not easy for someone already
weakened to the point of exhaustion. Or two megaphones are constructed of roUed-up cardboard, and
two interrogators, coming close to the prisoner, bellow in both ears: "Confess, you rat!" The prisoner
is deafened; sometimes he actually loses his sense of hearing. But this method is uneconomical. The
fact is that the interrogators like some diversion in their monotonous work, and so they vie in



thinking up new ideas.



11. Tickling: This is also a diversion. The prisoner's arms and legs are bound or held down, and then
the inside of his nose is tickled with a feather. The prisoner writhes; it feels as though someone were
drilling into his brain.

12. A cigarette is put out on the accused's skin (already mentioned above).

13. Light effects involve the use of an extremely bright electric light in the small, white-walled cell
or "box" in which the accused is being held — a light which is never extinguished. (The electricity
saved by the economies of schoolchildren and house-wives!) Your eyelids become inflamed, which
is very painful. And then in the interrogation room searchlights are again directed into your eyes.

14. Here is another imaginative trick: On the eve of May 1, 1933, in the Khabarovsk GPU, for twelve
hours — all night — Chebotaryev was not interrogated, no, but was simply kept in a continual state of
being led to interrogation. "Hey, you — hands behind your back!" They led him out of the cell, up the
stairs quickly, into the interrogator's office. The guard left. But the interrogator, without asking one
single question, and sometimes without even allowing Chebotaryev to sit down, would pick up the
telephone: "Take away the prisoner from 107!" And so they came to get him and took him back to
his cell. No sooner had he lain down on his board bunk than the lock rattled: "Chebotaryev! To
interrogation. Hands behind your back!" And when he got there: "Take away the prisoner from 107!"

For that matter, the methods of bringing pressure to bear can begin a long time before the
interrogator's office.

15. Prison begins with the box, in other words, what amounts to a closet or packing case. The human
being who has just been taken from freedom, still in a state of inner turmoil, ready to explain, to
argue, to struggle, is, when he first sets foot in prison, clapped into a "box," which sometimes has a
lamp and a place where he can sit down, but which sometimes is dark and constructed in such a way
that he can only stand up and even then is squeezed against the door. And he is held there for several
hours, or for half a day, or a day. During those hours he knows absolutely nothing! Will he perhaps
be confined there all his life? He has never in his life encountered anything like this, and he cannot
guess at the outcome. Those first hours are passing when everything inside him is still ablaze from
the unstilled storm in his heart. Some become despondent — and that's the time to subject them to
their first interrogation. Others become angry — and that, too, is all to the good, for they may insult
the interrogator right at the start or make a slip, and it will be all the easier to cook up their case.

16. When boxes were in short supply, they used to have another method. In the Novocherkassk
NKVD, Yelena Strutinskaya was forced to remain seated on a stool in the corridor for six days in
such a way that she did not lean against anything, did not sleep, did not fall off, and did not get up
from it. Six days! Just try to sit that way for six hours!

Then again, as a variation, the prisoner can be forced to sit on a tall chair, of the kind used in
laboratories, so that his feet do not reach the floor. They become very numb in this position. He is
left sitting that way from eight to ten hours.

Or else, during the interrogation itself, when the prisoner is out in plain view, he can be forced to sit
in this way: as far forward as possible on the front edge ("Move further forward! Further still!") of
the chair so that he is under painful pressure during the entire interrogation. He is not allowed to stir
for several hours. Is that all? Yes, that's all. Just try it yourself!

17. Depending on local conditions, a divisional pit can be substituted for the box, as was done in the

Gorokhovets army camps during World War II. The prisoner was pushed into such a pit, ten feet in
depth, six and a half feet in diameter; and beneath the open sky, rain or shine, this pit was for several



days both his cell and his latrine. And ten and a half ounces of bread, and water, were lowered to him
on a cord. Imagine yourself in this situation just after you've been arrested, when you're all in a boil.

Either identical orders to all Special Branches of the Red Army or else the similarities of their
situations in the field led to broad use of this method. Thus, in the 36th Motorized Infantry Division,
a unit which took part in the battle of Khalkhin-Gol, and which was encamped in the Mongolian
desert in 1941, a newly arrested prisoner was, without explanation, given a spade by Chief of the
Special Branch Samulyev and ordered to dig a pit the exact dimensions of a grave. (Here is a
hybridization of physical and psychological methods.) When the prisoner had dug deeper than his
own waist, they ordered him to stop and sit down on the bottom: his head was no longer visible. One
guard kept watch over several such pits and it was as though he were surrounded by empty space.

[This, evidently, is a Mongolian theme. In the magazine Niva (March 15, 1914, p. 218) there is a
drawing of a Mongolian prison: each prisoner is shut in a separate trunk with a small opening for his
head or for food. A jailer patrols between the trunks.]

They kept the accused in this desert with no protection from the Mongolian sun and with no warm
clothing against the cold of the night, but no tortures — why waste effort on tortures? The ration they
gave was three and a half ounces of bread per day and one glass of water. Lieutenant Chulpenyev, a
giant, a boxer, twenty-one years old, spent a month imprisoned this way. Within ten days he was
swarming with lice. After fifteen days he was summoned to interrogation for the first time.

18. The accused could be compelled to stand on his knees — not in some figurative sense, but
literally: on his knees, without sitting back on his heels, and with his back upright. People could be
compelled to kneel in the interrogator's office or the corridor for twelve, or even twenty-four or
forty-eight hours. (The interrogator himself could go home, sleep, amuse himself in one way or
another — this was an organized system; watch was kept over the kneeling prisoner, and the guards
worked in shifts.)

[That, after all, is how somebody's career was launched — standing guard over a prisoner on his
knees. And now, in all probability, that somebody has attained high rank and his children are already
grown up.]

What kind of prisoner was most vulnerable to such treatment? One already broken, already inclined
to surrender. It was also a good method to use with women. Ivanov-Razumnik reports a variation of
it: Having set young Lordkipanidze on his knees, the interrogator urinated in his face! And what
happened? Unbroken by anything else, Lordkipanidze was broken by this. Which shows that the
method also worked well on proud people. . . .

19. Then there is the method of simply compelling a prisoner to stand there. This can be arranged so
that the accused stands only while being interrogated — because that, too, exhausts and breaks a
person down. It can be set up in another way — so that the prisoner sits down during interrogation but
is forced to stand up between interrogations. (A watch is set over him, and the guards see to it that he
doesn't lean against the wall, and if he goes to sleep and falls over he is given a kick and straightened
up.) Sometimes even one day of standing is enough to deprive a person of all his strength and to
force him to testify to anything at all.

20. During all these tortures which involved standing for three, four, and five days, they ordinarily
deprived a person of water.

The most natural thing of all is to combine the psychological and physical methods. It is also natural
to combine all the preceding methods with:

21. Sleeplessness, which they quite failed to appreciate in medieval times. They did not understand



how narrow are the limits within which a human being can preserve his personality intact.
Sleeplessness (yes, combined with standing, thirst, bright light, terror, and the unknown — what other
tortures are needed!?) befogs the reason, undermines the will, and the human being ceases to be
himself, to be his own "I." (As in Chekhov's "I Want to Sleep," but there it was much easier, for
there the girl could lie down and slip into lapses of consciousness, which even in just a minute would
revive and refresh the brain.) A person deprived of sleep acts half -unconsciously or altogether
unconsciously, so that his testimony cannot be held against him.

[Just picture a foreigner, who knows no Russian, in this muddled state, being given something to
sign. Under these conditions the Bavarian Jupp Aschenbrenner signed a document admitting that he
had worked on wartime gas vans. It was not until 1954, in camp, that he was finally able to prove
that at the time he had been in Munich, studying to become an electric welder.]

They used to say: "You are not truthful in your testimony, and therefore you will not be allowed to
sleep!" Sometimes, as a refinement, instead of making the prisoner stand up, they made him sit down
on a soft sofa, which made him want to sleep all the more. (The jailer on duty sat next to him on the
same sofa and kicked him every time his eyes began to shut.) Here is how one victim — who had just
sat out days in a box infested with bedbugs — describes his feelings after this torture: "Chill from
great loss of blood. Irises of the eyes dried out as if someone were holding a red-hot iron in front of
them. Tongue swollen from thirst and prickling as from a hedgehog at the slightest movement.
Throat racked by spasms of swallowing."

Sleeplessness was a great form of torture: it left no visible marks and could not provide grounds for
complaint even if an inspection — something unheard of anyway — were to strike on the morrow.

[Inspection, by the way, was so totally impossible and had so emphatically never taken place that in
1953, when real inspectors entered the cell of former Minister of State Security Abakumov, himself
a prisoner by that time, he roared with laughter, thinking their appearance was a trick intended to
confuse him.]

"They didn't let you sleep? Well, after all, this is not supposed to be a vacation resort. The Security
officials were awake too!" (They would catch up on their sleep during the day.) One can say that
sleeplessness became the universal method in the Organs. From being one among many tortures, it
became an integral part of the system of State Security; it was the cheapest possible method and did
not require the posting of sentries. In all the interrogation prisons the prisoners were forbidden to
sleep even one minute from reveille till taps. (In Sukhanovka and several other prisons used
specifically for interrogation, the cot was folded into the wall during the day; in others, the prisoners
were simply forbidden to lie down, and even to close their eyes while seated.) Since the major
interrogations were all conducted at night, it was automatic: whoever was undergoing interrogation
got no sleep for at least five days and nights. (Saturday and Sunday nights, the interrogators
themselves tried to get some rest.)

22. The above method was further implemented by an assembly line of interrogators. Not only were
you not allowed to sleep, but for three or four days shifts of interrogators kept up a continuous
interrogation.

23. The bedbug-infested box has already been mentioned. In the dark closet made of wooden planks,
there were hundreds, maybe even thousands, of bedbugs, which had been allowed to multiply. The
guards removed the prisoner's jacket or field shirt, and immediately the hungry bedbugs assaulted
him, crawling onto him from the walls or falling off the ceiling. At first he waged war with them
strenuously, crushing them on his body and on the walls, suffocated by their stink. But after several
hours he weakened and let them drink his blood without a murmur.

24. Punishment cells. No matter how hard it was in the ordinary cell, the punishment cells were



always worse. And on return from there the ordinary cell always seemed like paradise. In the
punishment cell a human being was systematically worn down by starvation and also, usually, by
cold. (In Sukhanovka Prison there were also hot punishment cells.) For example, the Lefortovo
punishment cells were entirely unheated. There were radiators in the corridor only, and in this
"heated" corridor the guards on duty walked in felt boots and padded jackets. The prisoner was
forced to undress down to his underwear, and sometimes to his undershorts, and he was forced to
spend from three to five days in the punishment cell without moving (since it was so confining). He
received hot gruel on the third day only. For the first few minutes you were convinced you'd not be
able to last an hour. But, by some miracle, a human being would indeed sit out his five days, perhaps
acquiring in the course of it an illness that would last him the rest of his life.

There were various aspects to punishment cells — as, for instance, dampness and water. In the

Chernovtsy Prison after the war, Masha G. was kept barefooted for two hours and up to her ankles in
icy water — confess! (She was eighteen years old, and how she feared for her feet! She was going to
have to live with them a long time.)

25. Should one consider it a variation of the punishment cell when a prisoner was locked in an
alcove? As long ago as 1933 this was one of the ways they tortured S. A. Chebotaryev in the
Khabarovsk GPU. They locked him naked in a concrete alcove in such a way that he could neither
bend his knees, nor straighten up and change the position of his arms, nor turn his head. And that
was not all! They began to drip cold water onto his scalp — a classic torture — which then ran down
his body in rivulets. They did not inform him, of course, that this would go on for only twenty -four
hours. It was awful enough at any rate for him to lose consciousness, and he was discovered the next
day apparently dead. He came to on a hospital cot. They had brought him out of his faint with spirits
of ammonia, caffeine, and body massage. At first he had no recollection of where he had been, or
what had happened. For a whole month he was useless even for interrogation. (We may be so bold as
to assume that this alcove and dripping device had not been devised for Chebotaryev alone. In 1949
my Dnepropetrovsk acquaintance had been similarly confined, without the dripping attachment,
however. On a line joining Khabarovsk and Dnepropetrovsk, and over a period of sixteen years,
were there not other such points as well?)

26. Starvation has already been mentioned in combination with other methods. Nor was it an unusual
method: to starve the prisoner into confession. Actually, the starvation technique, like interrogation
at night, was an integral element in the entire system of coercion. The miserly prison bread ration,
amounting to ten and a half ounces in the peacetime year of 1933, and to one pound in 1945 in the
Lubyanka, and permitting or prohibiting food parcels from one's family and access to the
commissary, were universally applied to everyone. But there was also the technique of intensified
hunger: for example, Chulpenyev was kept for a month on three and a half ounces of bread, after
which — when he had just been brought in from the pit — the interrogator Sokol placed in front of him
a pot of thick borscht, and half a loaf of white bread sliced diagonally. (What does it matter, one
might ask, how it was sliced? But Chulpenyev even today will insist that it was really sliced very
attractively.) However, he was not given a thing to eat. How ancient it all is, how medieval, how
primitive! The only thing new about it was that it was applied in a socialist society! Others, too, tell
about such tricks. They were often tried. But we are going to cite another case involving
Chebotaryev because it combined so many methods. They put him in the interrogator's office for
seventy-two hours, and the only thing he was allowed was to be taken to the toilet. For the rest, they
allowed him neither food nor drink — even though there was water in a carafe right next to him. Nor
was he permitted to sleep. Throughout there were three interrogators in the office, working in shifts.
One kept writing something — silently, without disturbing the prisoner. The second slept on the sofa,
and the third walked around the room, and as soon as Chebotaryev fell asleep, beat him instantly.
Then they switched roles. (Maybe they themselves were being punished for failure to deliver.) And
then, all of a sudden, they brought Chebotaryev a meal: fat Ukrainian borscht, a chop, fried potatoes,
and red wine in a crystal carafe. But because Chebotaryev had had an aversion to alcohol all his life,
he refused to drink the wine, and the interrogator couldn't go too far in forcing him to, because that



would have spoiled the whole game. After he had eaten, they said to him: "Now here's what you
have testified to in the presence of two witnesses. Sign here." In other words, he was to sign what had
been silently composed by one interrogator in the presence of another, who had been asleep, and a
third, who had been actively working. On the very first page Chebotaryev learned he had been on
intimate terms with all the leading Japanese generals and that he had received espionage assignments
from all of them. He began to cross out whole pages. They beat him up and threw him out. Blaginin,
another Chinese Eastern Railroad man, arrested with him, was put through the same thing; but he
drank the wine and, in a state of pleasant intoxication, signed the confession — and was shot. (Even
one tiny glass can have an enormous effect on a famished man — and that was a whole carafe.)

27. Beatings — of a kind that leave no marks. They use rubber truncheons, and they use wooden
mallets and small sandbags. It is very, very painful when they hit a bone — for example, an
interrogator's jackboot on the shin, where the bone lies just beneath the skin. They beat Brigade
Commander Karpunich-Braven for twenty-one days in a row. And today he says: "Even after thirty
years all my bones ache — and my head too." In recollecting his own experience and the stories of
others, he counts up to fifty-two methods of torture. Here is one: They grip the hand in a special vise
so that the prisoner's palm lies flat on the desk — and then they hit the joints with the thin edge of a
ruler. And one screams! Should we single out particularly the technique by which teeth are knocked
out? They knocked out eight of Karpunich's.

[In the case of the Secretary of the Karelian Provincial Party Committee, G. Kupriyanov, arrested in
1949, some of the teeth they knocked out were just ordinary ones, of no particular account, but
others were gold. At first they gave him a receipt that said his gold teeth were being kept for him.
And then they caught themselves just in time and took away his receipt.]

As everyone knows, a blow of the fist in the solar plexus, catching the victim in the middle of a
breath, leaves no mark whatever. The Lefortovo Colonel Sidorov, in the postwar period, used to take
a "penalty kick" with his overshoes at the dangling genitals of male prisoners. Soccer players who at
one time or another have been hit in the groin by a ball know what that kind of blow is like. There is
no pain comparable to it, and ordinarily the recipient loses consciousness.

[In 1918 the Moscow Revolutionary Tribunal convicted the former Tsarist jailer Bondar. The most
extreme measure of his cruelty that was cited was the accusation that "in one case he had struck a
political prisoner with such force that his eardrum had burst." (Krylenko, op. cit., p. 16.)]

28. In the Novorossisk NKVD they invented a machine for squeezing fingernails. As a result it could
be observed later at transit prisons that many of those from Novorossisk had lost their fingernails.

29. And what about the strait jacket?

30. And breaking the prisoner's back? (As in that same Khabarovsk GPU in 1933.)

31. Or bridling (also known as "the swan dive")? This was a Sukhanovka method — also used in
Archangel, where the interrogator Ivkov applied it in 1940. A long piece of rough toweling was
inserted between the prisoner's jaws like a bridle; the ends were then pulled back over his shoulders
and tied to his heels. Just try lying on your stomach like a wheel, with your spine breaking — and
without water and food for two days !

Is it necessary to go on with the list? Is there much left to enumerate? What won't idle, well-fed,
unfeeling people invent?

Brother mine! Do not condemn those who, finding themselves in such a situation, turned out to be
weak and confessed to more than they should have. ... Do not be the first to cast a stone at them.



But here's the point! Neither these methods nor even the "lightest" methods of all are needed to
wring testimony from the majority ... for iron jaws to grip lambs who are unprepared and longing to
return to their warm hearths. The relationship of forces to situations is too unequal.

Oh, in how new a light does our past life appear when re-examined in the interrogator's office:
abounding in dangers, like an African jungle. And we had considered it so simple!

You, A, and your friend, B, have known each other for years and have complete faith in one another.
When you met, you spoke out boldly about political matters large and small. No one else was
present. There was no one who could have overheard you. And you have not denounced each
other — not at all.

But at this point, for some reason, you. A, have been marked, hauled out of the herd by the ears, and
arrested. And for some reason — well, maybe not without a denunciation on somebody's part, and not
without your apprehensions as to the fate of your loved ones, and not without a certain lack of sleep,
and not without a bit of punishment cell — you have decided to write yourself off but at the same time
not to betray anyone else at any price.

You have therefore confessed in four depositions, and signed them — declaring yourself to be a
sworn enemy of Soviet power — because you used to tell jokes about the Leader, because you
thought there should be a choice of candidates at elections, because you went into the voting booth
only in order to cross out the name of the only candidate and would have done so except there was
no ink in the inkwell, and because there was a 16-meter band on your radio on which you tried to
catch parts of Western broadcasts through the jamming. Your own tenner has been assured, yet your
ribs have remained whole, and so far you have not caught pneumonia. You have not sold anyone out;
and it seems to you that you have worked things out sensibly. You have already informed your
cellmates that in your opinion your interrogation is probably coming to an end.

But lo and behold! Admiring his own handwriting, and with deliberation, the interrogator begins to
fill out deposition No. 5. Question: Were you friendly with B? Answer: Yes. Question: Were you
frank with him about politics? Answer: No, no, I did not trust him. Question: But you met often?
Answer: Not very. Question: What does that mean, not very? According to testimony from your
neighbors, he was at your house on such and such a day, and on such and such, and on such and such
just in the past month. Was he? Answer: Maybe. Question: And it was observed that on these
occasions, as always, you did not drink, you did not make any noise, you spoke very quietly, and you
couldn't be overheard even in the corridor? (Well, friends, drink up! Break bottles! Curse at the top
of your lungs! On that basis you will be considered reliable.) Answer: Well, what of it? Question:
And you used to visit him too. And you said to him on the phone, for example: "We spent such an
interesting evening." Then they saw you on the street at an intersection. You were standing there
together in the cold for half an hour, and you both had gloomy faces and dissatisfied expressions; in
fact, they even took photographs of you during that meeting. (The technological resources of agents,
my friends, the technology of agents!) So what did you talk about during these meetings?

What about? That's a leading question! Your first idea is to say that you've forgotten what you talked
about. Are you really obliged to remember? So! You've forgotten your first conversation. And the
second one too? And the third? And even your interesting evening? And that time at the intersection?
And your conversations with C? And your conversations with D? No, you think: "I forgot" is not the
way out; you will be unable to maintain that position. And your mind, still shocked by your arrest, in
the grip of fear, muddled by sleeplessness and hunger, seeks a way out: how to play it shrewdly in a
manner that will have some verisimilitude and outsmart the interrogator.

What about? It is fine if you talked about hockey — that, friends, is in all cases the least troublesome!
Or about women, or even about science. Then you can repeat what was said. (Science is not too far
removed from hockey, but in our time everything to do with science is classified information and



they may get you for a violation of the Decree on Revealing State Secrets.) But what if you did in
actual fact talk about the latest arrests in the city? Or about the collective farms? (Of course,
critically — for who has anything good to say about them?) Or about reducing the rate of pay for
piecework? The fact remains that you frowned for half an hour at the intersection — what were you
talking about there?

Maybe B has already been arrested. The interrogator assures you that he has been, and that he has
already given evidence against you, and that they are about to bring him in for a confrontation with
you. Maybe he is sitting home very calmly and quietly, but they might very well bring him in for
questioning and then they will find out from him what you were frowning about for half an hour at
that intersection.

At this point, too late, you have come to understand that, because of the way life is, you and he ought
to have reached an agreement every time you parted and remembered clearly what you were going to
say if you were asked what you had talked about that day. Then, regardless of interrogations, your
testimony and his would agree. But you had not made any such agreement. You had unfortunately
not understood what kind of a jungle you lived in.

Should you say that you were talking about going on a fishing trip? But then B might say that there
was never any discussion of fishing, that you talked about correspondence-school courses. In that
case, instead of causing the investigation to ease up a bit, you would only tie the noose tighter: what
about, what about, what about?

And the idea flashes through your mind — is it a brilliant or a fatal one? — that you ought to come as

close as you can to the truth of what was actually said — of course rounding off the sharp edges and
skipping the dangerous parts. After all, people say that when you lie you should always stay as close
to the truth as possible. And maybe B will guess what's up and say approximately the same thing and
then your testimony will coincide in some respects and they will leave you in peace.

Many years later you will come to understand that this was not really a wise idea, and that it is much
smarter to play the role of someone so improbably imbecile that he can't remember one single day of
his life even at the risk of being beaten. But you have been kept awake for three days. You have
hardly strength enough to follow the course of your own thoughts and to maintain an imperturbable
expression. And you don't have even a minute to think things over. Suddenly two interrogators — for
they enjoy visiting one another — are at you: What were you talking about? What about? What
about?

And you testify: We were talking about collective farms — to the effect that not everything had as yet
been set to rights on them but it soon would be. We talked about the lowering of piece rates. . . . And
what in particular did you say about them? That you were delighted they had been reduced? But that
wasn't the way people normally talked — it was too implausible. And so as to make it seem an
altogether believable conversation, you concede that you complained just a little that they were
putting on the squeeze a bit with piece rates.

The interrogator writes down the deposition himself, translating it into his own language: At this
meeting we slandered Party and government policy in the field of wages.

And someday B is going to accuse you: "Oh, you blabbermouth, and I said we were making plans to
go fishing."

But you tried to outsmart your interrogator! You have a quick, abstruse mind. You are an
intellectual! And you outsmarted yourself. . . .

In Crime and Punishment, Porfiri Petrovich makes a surprisingly astute remark to Raskolnikov, to



the effect that he could have been found out only by someone who had himself gone through that
same cat-and-mouse game — implying, so to speak: "1 don't even have to construct my own version
with you intellectuals. You will put it together yourselves and bring it to me all wrapped up." Yes,
that's so! An intellectual cannot reply with the delightful incoherence of Chekhov's "Malefactor." He
is bound to try to build up in logical form the whole story he is being accused of, no matter how
much falsehood it contains.

But the interrogator-butcher isn't interested in logic; he just wants to catch two or three phrases. He
knows what he wants. And as for us — we are totally unprepared for anything.

From childhood on we are educated and trained — for our own profession; for our civil duties; for
military service; to take care of our bodily needs; to behave well; even to appreciate beauty (well,
this last not really all that much!). But neither our education, nor our upbringing, nor our experience
prepares us in the slightest for the greatest trial of our lives: being arrested for nothing and
interrogated about nothing. Novels, plays, films (their authors should themselves be forced to drink
the cup of Gulag to the bottom!) depict the types one meets in the offices of interrogators as
chivalrous guardians of truth and humanitarianism, as our loving fathers. We are exposed to lectures
on everything under the sun — and are even herded in to listen to them. But no one is going to lecture
to us about the true and extended significance of the Criminal Code; and the codes themselves are
not on open shelves in our libraries, nor sold at newsstands; nor do they fall into the hands of the
heedless young.

It seems a virtual fairy tale that somewhere, at the ends of the earth, an accused person can avail
himself of a lawyer's help. This means having beside you in the most difficult moment of your life a
clear-minded ally who knows the law.

The principle of our interrogation consists further in depriving the accused of even a knowledge of
the law.

An indictment is presented. And here, incidentally, is how it's presented: "Sign it." "It's not true."
"Sign." "But I'm not guilty of anything!" It turns out that you are being indicted under the provisions
of Articles 58-10. Part 2, and 58-11 of the Criminal Code of the Russian Republic. "Sign!" "But what
do these sections say? Let me read the Code!" "I don't have it." "Well, get it from your department
head!" "He doesn't have it either. Sign!" "But I want to see it." "You are not supposed to see it. It
isn't written for you but for us. You don't need it. I'll tell you what it says: these sections spell out
exactly what you are guilty of. And anyway, at this point your signature doesn't mean that you agree
with the indictment but that you've read it, that it's been presented to you."

All of a sudden, a new combination of letters, UPK, flashes by on one of the pieces of paper. Your
sense of caution is aroused. What's the difference between the UPK and the UK — ^the Criminal
Code? If you've been lucky enough to catch the interrogator when he is in a good mood, he will
explain it to you: the UPK is the Code of Criminal Procedure. What? This means that there are two
distinct codes, not just one, of whose contents you are completely ignorant even as you are being
trampled under their provisions.

Since that time ten years have passed; then fifteen. The grass has grown thick over the grave of my
youth. I served out my term and even "eternal exile" as well. And nowhere — neither in the "cultural
education" sections of the camps, nor in district libraries, nor even in medium-sized cities, have I
seen with my own eyes, held in my own hands, been able to buy, obtain, or even ask for the Code of
Soviet law!

[Those familiar with our atmosphere of suspicion will understand why it was impossible to ask for
the Code in a people's court or in the District Executive Committee. Your interest in the Code would
be an extraordinary phenomenon: you must either be preparing to commit a crime or be trying to



cover your tracks.]

And of the hundreds of prisoners I knew who had gone through interrogation and trial, and more
than once too, who had served sentences in camp and in exile, none had ever seen the Code or held it
in his hand!

It was only when both codes were thirty-five years old and on the point of being replaced by new
ones that I saw them, two little paperback brothers, the UK or Criminal Code, and the UPK or Code
of Criminal Procedure, on a newsstand in the Moscow subway (because they were outdated, it had
been decided to release them for general circulation).

I read them today touched with emotion. For example, the UPK — the Code of Criminal Procedure:

"Article 136: The interrogator does not have the right to extract testimony or a confession from an
accused by means of compulsion and threats." (It was as though they had foreseen it!)

"Article 111: The interrogator is obliged to establish clearly all the relevant facts, both those tending
toward acquittal and any which might lessen the accused's measure of guilt."

But it was I who helped establish Soviet power in October! It was I who shot Kolchak! I took part in
the dispossession of the kulaks! I saved the state ten million rubles in lowered production costs! I
was wounded twice in the war! I have three orders and decorations.

"You're not being tried for that!" History ... the bared teeth of the interrogator: "Whatever good you
may have done has nothing to do with the case."

"Article 139: The accused has the right to set forth his testimony in his own hand, and to demand the
right to make corrections in the deposition written by the interrogator."

Oh, if we had only known that in time! But what I should say is: If that were only the way it really
was! We were always vainly imploring the interrogator not to write "my repulsive, slanderous
fabrications" instead of "my mistaken statements," or not to write "our underground weapons
arsenal" instead of "my rusty Finnish knife."

If only the defendants had first been taught some prison science! If only interrogation had been run
through first in rehearsal, and only afterward for real. . . . They didn't, after all, play that
interrogation game with the second-termers of 1948: it would have gotten them nowhere. But
newcomers had no experience, no knowledge! And there was no one from whom to seek advice.

The loneliness of the accused! That was one more factor in the success of unjust interrogation! The
entire apparatus threw its full weight on one lonely and inhibited will. From the moment of his arrest
and throughout the entire shock period of the interrogation the prisoner was, ideally, to be kept
entirely alone. In his cell, in the corridor, on the stairs, in the offices, he was not supposed to
encounter others like himself, in order to avoid the risk of his gleaning a bit of sympathy, advice,
support from someone's smile or glance. The Organs did everything to blot out for him his future
and distort his present: to lead him to believe that his friends and family had all been arrested and
that material proof of his guilt had been found. It was their habit to exaggerate their power to destroy
him and those he loved as well as their authority to pardon (which the Organs didn't even have).
They pretended that there was some connection between the sincerity of a prisoner's "repentance"
and a reduction in his sentence or an easing of the camp regimen. (No such connection ever existed.)
While the prisoner was still in a state of shock and torment and totally beside himself, they tried to
get from him very quickly as many irreparably damaging items of evidence as possible and to
implicate with him as many totally innocent persons as possible. Some defendants became so
depressed in these circumstances that they even asked not to have the depositions read to them. They



could not stand hearing them. They asked merely to be allowed to sign them, just to sign and get it
over with. Only after all this was over would the prisoner be released from solitary into a large cell,
where, in belated desperation, he would discover and count over his mistakes one by one.

How was it possible not to make mistakes in such a duel? Who could have failed to make a mistake?

We said that "ideally he was to be kept alone." However, in the overcrowded prisons of 1937, and,
for that matter, of 1945 as well, this ideal of solitary confinement for a newly arrested defendant
could not be attained. Almost from his first hours, the prisoner was in fact in a terribly overcrowded
common cell.

But there were virtues to this arrangement, too, which more than made up for its flaws. The
overcrowding of the cells not only took the place of the tightly confined solitary "box" but also
assumed the character of a first-class torture in itself . . . one that was particularly useful because it
continued for whole days and weeks — with no effort on the part of the interrogators. The prisoners
tortured the prisoners! The jailers pushed so many prisoners into the cell that not every one had even
a piece of floor; some were sitting on others' feet, and people walked on people and couldn't even
move about at all. Thus, in the Kishinev KPZ's — Cells for Preliminary Detention — in 1945, they
pushed eighteen prisoners into a cell designed for the solitary confinement of one person; in Lugansk
in 1937 it was fifteen.

[And the interrogation there lasted eight to ten months at a time. "Maybe Klim [Voroshilov] had one
of thes; to himself," said the fellows there. (Was he, in fact, ever imprisoned?)]

And in 1938 Ivanov-Razumnik found one hundred forty prisoners in a standard Butyrki cell intended
for twenty-five — with toilets so overburdened that prisoners were taken to the toilet only once a day,
sometimes at night; and the same thing was true of their outdoor walk as well.

[That same year in the Butyrki, those newly arrested, who had already been processed through the
bath and the boxes, sat on the stairs for several days at a stretch, waiting for departing prisoner

transports to leave and release space in the cells. T v had been imprisoned in the Butyrki seven

years earlier, in 1931, and says that it was overcrowded under the bunks and that prisoners lay on the
asphalt floor. I myself was imprisoned seven years later, in 1945, and it was just the same. But

recently I received from M. K. B ch valuable personal testimony about overcrowding in the

Butyrki in 1918. In October of that year — during the second month of the Red Terror — it was so full
that they even set up a cell for seventy women in the laundry. When, then, was the Butj^ki not
crowded?]

It was Ivanov-Razumnik who in the Lubyanka reception "kennel" calculated that for weeks at a time
there were three persons for each square yard of floor space (just as an experiment, try to fit three
people into that space!) .

[But this, too, is no miracle: in the Vladimir Internal Prison in 1948, thirty people had to stand in a
cell ten feet by ten feet in size! (S. Potapov.)]

In this "kennel" there was neither ventilation nor a window, and the prison- ers' body heat and
breathing raised the temperature to 40 or 45 degrees Centigrade — 104 to 1 13 degrees Fahrenheit —
and everyone sat there in undershorts with their winter clothing piled beneath them. Their naked
bodies were pressed against one another, and they got eczema from one another's sweat. They sat
like that for weeks at a time, and were given neither fresh air nor water — except for gruel and tea in
the morning.

[By and large there is a good deal in Ivanov-Razumnik's book that is superficial and personal, and
there are many exhaustingly monotonous jokes. But the real life of the cells in the 1937-1938 period



is very well described there.]

And if at the same time the latrine bucket replaced all other types of toilet (or if, on the other hand,
there was no latrine bucket for use between trips to an outside toilet, as was the case in several
Siberian prisons); and if four people ate from one bowl, sitting on each other's knees; and if someone
was hauled out for interrogation, and then someone else was pushed in beaten up, sleepless, and
broken; and if the appearance of such broken men was more persuasive than any threats on the part
of the interrogators; and if, by then, death and any camp whatever seemed easier to a prisoner who
had been left unsummoned for months than his tormented current situation — perhaps this really did
replace the theoretically ideal isolation in solitary. And you could not always decide in such a
porridge of people with whom to be forthright; and you could not always find someone from whom
to seek advice. And you would believe in the tortures and beatings not when the interrogator
threatened you with them but when you saw their results on other prisoners.

You could learn from those who had suffered that they could give you a salt-water douche in the
throat and then leave you in a box for a day tormented by thirst (Karpunich). Or that they might
scrape the skin off a man's back with a grater till it bled and then oil it with turpentine. (Brigade
Commander Rudolf Pintsov underwent both treatments. In addition, they pushed needles under his
nails, and poured water into him to the bursting point — demanding that he confess to having wanted
to turn his brigade of tanks against the government during the November parade.)

[In actual fact, he did lead his brigade at the parade, but for some reason he did not turn it against the
government. But this was not taken into account. However, after these most varied tortures, he was
sentenced to ten years by the OSO. To that degree, the gendarmes themselves had no faith in their
achievements.]

And from Aleksandrov, the former head of the Arts Section of the AU-Union Society for Cultural
Relations with Foreign Countries, who has a broken spinal column which tilts to one side, and who
cannot control his tear ducts and thus cannot stop crying, one can learn how Abakumov himself could
beat— in 1948.

Yes, yes. Minister of State Security Abakumov himself did not by any means spurn such menial
labor. (A Suvorov at the head of his troops !) He was not averse to taking a rubber truncheon in his
hands every once in a while. And his deputy Ryumin was even more willing. He did this at
Sukhanovka in the "Generals' " interrogation office. The office had imitation-walnut paneling on the
walls, silk portieres at the windows and doors, and a great Persian carpet on the floor. In order not to
spoil all this beauty, a dirty runner bespattered with blood was rolled out on top of the carpet when a
prisoner was being beaten. When Ryumin was doing the beating, he was assisted not by some
ordinary guard but by a colonel. "And so," said Ryumin politely, stroking his rubber truncheon,
which was four centimeters — an inch and a half — thick, "you have survived trial by sleeplessness
with honor." (Alexander D. had cleverly managed to last a month "without sleep" by sleeping while
he was standing up.) "So now we will try the club. Prisoners can't take more than two or three
sessions of this. Let down your trousers and lie down on the runner." The colonel sat down on the
prisoner's back. A.D. was going to count the blows. He didn't yet know about a blow from a rubber
truncheon on the sciatic nerve when the buttocks have disappeared as a consequence of prolonged
starvation. The effect is not felt in the place where the blow is delivered — it explodes inside the
head. After the first blow the victim was mad with pain and broke his nails on the carpet. Ryumin
beat away, trying to hit accurately. The colonel pressed down on A.D.'s torso — this was just the right
sort of work for three big shoulder-board stars, assisting the all-powerful Ryumin! (After the beating
the prisoner could not walk and, of course, was not carried. They just dragged him along the floor.
What was left of his buttocks was soon so swollen that he could not button his trousers, and yet there
were practically no scars. He was hit by a violent case of diarrhea, and, sitting there on the latrine
bucket in solitary, A.D. guffawed. He went through a second and a third session, and his skin
cracked, and Ryumin went wild, and started to beat him on the stomach, breaking through the



intestinal wall and creating an enormous hernia tlirougli wliicli A.D.'s intestines protruded. The
prisoner was taken off to the Butyrki hospital with a case of peritonitis, and for the time being their
attempts to compel him to commit a foul deed were suspended.)

That is how they can torture you too! After that it could seem a simple fatherly caress when the
Kishinev interrogator Danilov beat Father Viktor Shipovalnikov across the back of the head with a
poker and pulled him by his long hair. (It is very convenient to drag a priest around in that fashion;
ordinary laymen can be dragged by the beard from one comer of the office to the other. And Richard
Ohola — a Finnish Red Guard, and a participant in the capture of British agent Sidney Reilly, and
commander of a company during the suppression of the Kronstadt revolt — was lifted up with pliers
first by one end of his great mustaches and then by the other, and held for ten minutes with his feet
off the floor.)

But the most awful thing they can do with you is this: undress you from the waist down, place you
on your back on the floor, pull your legs apart, seat assistants on them (from the glorious corps of
sergeants!) who also hold down your arms; and then the interrogator (and women interrogators have
not shrunk from this) stands between your legs and with the toe of his boot (or of her shoe)
gradually, steadily, and with ever greater pressure crushes against the floor those organs which once
made you a man. He looks into your eyes and repeats and repeats his questions or the betrayal he is
urging on you. If he does not press down too quickly or just a shade too powerfully, you still have
fifteen seconds left in which to scream that you will confess to everything, that you are ready to see
arrested all twenty of those people he's been demanding of you, or that you will slander in the
newspapers everything you hold holy. . . .

And may you be judged by God, but not by people. . . .

"There is no way out! You have to confess to everything!" whisper the stoolies who have been
planted in the cell.

"It's a simple question: hang onto your health!" say people with common sense.
"You can't get new teeth," those who have already lost them nod at you.

"They are going to convict you in any case, whether you confess or whether you don't," conclude
those who have got to the bottom of things.

"Those who don't sign get shot!" prophesies someone else in the comer. "Out of vengeance! So as
not to risk any leaks about how they conduct interrogations."

"And if you die in the interrogator's office, they'll tell your relatives you've been sentenced to camp
without the right of correspondence. And then just let them look for you."

If you are an orthodox Communist, then another orthodox Communist will sidle up to you, peering
about with hostile suspicion, and he'll begin to whisper in your ear so that the uninitiated cannot
overhear:

"It's our duty to support Soviet interrogation. It's a combat situation. We ourselves are to blame. We
were too softhearted; and now look at all the rot that has multiplied in the country. There is a vicious
secret war going on. Even here we are surrounded by enemies. Just listen to what they are saying!
The Party is not obliged to account for what it does to every single one of us — to explain the whys
and wherefores. If they ask us to, that means we should sign."

And another orthodox Communist sidles up:



"I signed denunciations against thirty-five people, against all my acquaintances. And I advise you
too: Drag along as many names as you can in your wake, as many as you can. That way it will
become obvious that the whole thing is an absurdity and they'll let everyone out!"

But that is precisely what the Organs need. The conscientiousness of the orthodox Communist and
the purpose of the NKVD naturally coincide. Indeed, the NKVD needs just that arched fan of names,
that fat multiplication of them. That is the mark of quality of their work, and these are also new
patches of woods in which to set out snares. "Your accomplices, accomplices! Others who share
your views!" That is what they keep pressing to shake out of everyone. They say that R. Ralov
named Cardinal Richelieu as one of his accomplices and that the Cardinal was in fact so listed in his
depositions — and no one was astonished by this until Ralov was questioned about it at his
rehabilitation proceedings in 1956.

Apropos of the orthodox Communists, Stalin was necessary, for such a purge as that, yes, but a Party
like that was necessary too: the majority of those in power, up to the very moment of their own
arrest, were pitiless in arresting others, obediently destroyed their peers in accordance with those
same instructions and handed over to retribution any friend or comrade-in-arms of yesterday. And all
the big Bolsheviks, who now wear martyrs' halos, managed to be the executioners of other
Bolsheviks (not even taking into account how all of them in the first place had been the executioners
of non-Communists). Perhaps 1937 was needed in order to show how little their whole ideology was
worth — that ideology of which they boasted so enthusiastically, turning Russia upside down,
destroying its foundations, trampling everything it held sacred underfoot, that Russia where they
themselves had never been threatened by such retribution. The victims of the Bolsheviks from 1918
to 1946 never conducted themselves so despicably as the leading Bolsheviks when the lightning
struck them. If you study in detail the whole history of the arrests and trials of 1936 to 1938, the
principal revulsion you feel is not against Stalin and his accomplices, but against the humiliatingly
repulsive defendants — nausea at their spiritual baseness after their former pride and implacability.

So what is the answer? How can you stand your ground when you are weak and sensitive to pain,
when people you love are still alive, when you are unprepared?

What do you need to make you stronger than the interrogator and the whole trap?

From the moment you go to prison you must put your cozy past firmly behind you. At the very
threshold, you must say to yourself: "My life is over, a little early to be sure, but there's nothing to be
done about it. I shall never return to freedom. I am condemned to die — ^now or a little later. But later
on, in truth, it will be even harder, and so the sooner the better. I no longer have any property
whatsoever. For me those I love have died, and for them I have died. From today on, my body is
useless and alien to me. Only my spirit and my conscience remain precious and important to me."

Confronted by such a prisoner, the interrogation will tremble.

Only the man who has renounced everything can win that victory.

But how can one turn one's body to stone?

Well, they managed to turn some individuals from the Berdyayev circle into puppets for a trial, but
they didn't succeed with Berdyayev. They wanted to drag him into an open trial; they arrested him
twice; and (in 1922) he was subjected to a night interrogation by Dzerzhinsky himself. Kamenev was
there too (which means that he, too, was not averse to using the Cheka in an ideological conflict).
But Berdyayev did not humiliate himself. He did not beg or plead. He set forth firmly those religious
and moral principles which had led him to refuse to accept the political authority established in
Russia. And not only did they come to the conclusion that he would be useless for a trial, but they
liberated him.



A human being has a point of view!

N. Stolyarova recalls an old woman who was her neighbor on the Butyrki bunks in 1937. They kept
on interrogating her every night. Two years earlier, a former Metropolitan of the Orthodox Church,
who had escaped from exile, had spent a night at her home on his way through Moscow. "But he
wasn't the former Metropolitan, he was the Metropolitan! Truly, I was worthy of receiving him."
"All right then. To whom did he go when he left Moscow?" "I know, but I won't tell you!" (The
Metropolitan had escaped to Finland via an underground railroad of believers.) At first the
interrogators took turns, and then they went after her in groups. They shook their fists in the little old
woman's face, and she replied: "There is nothing you can do with me even if you cut me into pieces.
After all, you are afraid of your bosses, and you are afraid of each other, and you are even afraid of
killing me." (They would lose contact with the underground railroad.) "But I am not afraid of
anything. I would be glad to be judged by God right this minute."

There were such people in 1937 too, people who did not return to their cell for their bundles of
belongings, who chose death, who signed nothing denouncing anyone.

One can't say that the history of the Russian revolutionaries has given us any better examples of
steadfastness. But there is no comparison anyway, because none of our revolutionaries ever knew
what a really good interrogation could be, with fifty-two different methods to choose from.

Sheshkovsky did not subject Radishchev to torture. And because of contemporary custom,
Radishchev knew perfectly well that his sons would serve as officers in the imperial guard no matter
what happened to him, and that their lives wouldn't be cut short. Nor would anyone confiscate
Radishchev's family estate. Nonetheless, in the course of his brief two-week interrogation, this
outstanding man renounced his beliefs and his book and begged for mercy.

Nicholas I didn't have enough imagination to arrest the wives of the Decembrists and compel them to

scream in the interrogation room next door, or even to torture the Decembrists themselves. But in
any case he didn't need to. Even Ryleyev "answered fully, frankly, and hid nothing." Even Pestel
broke down and named comrades (who were still free) assigned to bury Russkaya Pravda and the
very place where it had been buried.

[In part, the reason for this was the same as in the case of Bukharin many years later. They were,
after all, being interrogated by their social equals, their class brothers, and so their desire to explain
everything was only natural.]

There were very few who, like Lunin, expressed disdain and contempt for the investigating
commission. The majority behaved badly and got one another more deeply involved. Many of them
begged abjectly to be pardoned! Zavalishin put all the blame on Ryleyev. Y. P. Obolensky and S. P.
Trubetskoi couldn't wait to slander Griboyedov — which even Nicholas I didn't believe.

Bakunin in his Confessions abjectly groveled before Nicholas I — thereby avoiding execution. Was
this wretchedness of soul? Or revolutionary cunning?

One would think that those who decided to assassinate Alexander II must have been people of the
highest selflessness and dedication. After all, they knew what the stakes were! Grinevitsky shared
the fate of the Tsar, but Rysakov remained alive and was held for interrogation. And that very day he
blabbed on the participants in the plot and identified their secret meeting places. Out of fear for his
young life he rushed to give the government more information than he could ever have been
suspected of having. He nearly choked with repentance; he proposed to "expose all the secrets of the
Anarchists."

At the end of the last century and the beginning of this one, the Tsarist interrogator immediately



withdrew his question if the prisoner found it inappropriate or too intimate. But in Kresty Prison in
1938, when the old political hard-labor prisoner Zelensky was whipped with ramrods with his pants
pulled down like a small boy, he wept in his cell: "My Tsarist interrogator didn't even dare address
me rudely."

Or, for example, we learn from recently published research that the Tsarist gendarmes seized the
manuscript of Lenin's essay "What Are Our Ministers Thinking Of?" but were unable to get at its
author:

"At the interrogation the gendarmes, jm^'? as one might have expected, learned very little from the
student Vaneyev. [The italics here and throughout this quotation are my own.] He informed them
only that the manuscripts found at his place had been brought to him in one package for safekeeping
several days before the search by a certain person whom he did not wish to name. Therefore the
interrogator's sole alternative was to turn the manuscripts over for expert analysis." The experts
learned nothing. (What did he mean — his "sole alternative"? What about icy water up to the ankles?
Or a salt-water douche? Or Ryumin's truncheon?) It would seem that the author of this article, R.
Peresvetov, himself served time for several years and might easily have enumerated what
"alternatives" the interrogator actually had when confronting the guardian of Lenin's "What Are Our
Ministers Thinking Of?"

As S. P. Melgunov recollects: "That was a Tsarist prison, a prison of blessed memory, which
political prisoners nowadays can only recall with a feeling almost of gladness."

But that is a case of displaced concepts. The yardstick is totally different. Just as oxcart drivers of
Gogol's time could not have imagined the speed of a jet plane, those who have never gone through
the receiving-Une meat grinder of Gulag cannot grasp the true possibilities of interrogation.

We read in Izvestiya for May 24, 1959, that Yuliya Rumyantseva was confined in the internal prison
of a Nazi camp while they tried to find out from her the whereabouts of her husband, who had
escaped from that same camp. She knew, but she refused to tell! For a reader who is not in the know
this is a model of heroism. For a reader with a bitter Gulag past it's a model of inefficient
interrogation: Yuliya did not die under torture, and she was not driven insane. A month later she was
simply released — still very much alive and kicking.

All these thoughts about standing firm as a rock were quite unknown to me in February, 1945. Not
only was I not in the least prepared to cut my cozy ties with earth, I was even quite angry for a long
time because a hundred or so Faber pencils had been taken away from me when I was arrested.
Looking back on my interrogation from my long subsequent imprisonment, I had no reason to be
proud of it. I might have borne myself more firmly; and in all probability I could have maneuvered
more skillfully. But my first weeks were characterized by a mental blackout and a slump into
depression. The only reason these recollections do not torment me with remorse is that, thanks be to
God, I avoided getting anyone else arrested. But I came close to it.

Although we were front-line officers, Nikolai V. and I, who were involved in the same case, got
ourselves into prison through a piece of childish stupidity. He and I corresponded during the war,
between two sectors of the front; and though we knew perfectly well that wartime censorship of
correspondence was in effect, we indulged in fairly outspoken expressions of our political outrage
and in derogatory comments about the Wisest of the Wise, whom we labeled with the transparently
obvious nickname of Pakhan or Ringleader of the Thieves. (When, later on, I reported our case in
various prisons, our naivete aroused only laughter and astonishment. Other prisoners told me that
two more such stupid jackasses couldn't exist. And I became convinced of it myself. Then suddenly,
one day, reading some documents on the case of Aleksandr Ulyanov, Lenin's elder brother, I learned
that he and his confederates got caught in exactly the same way — a careless exchange of letters. And
that was the only reason Alexander III didn't die on March 1, 1887.)



[A member of the group, Andreyushkin sent a frank letter to his friend in Kharkov: "I am firmly
convinced that we are going to have the most merciless terror — and in the fairly near future too. . . .
Red Terror is my hobby. ... I am worried about my addressee. ... If he gets it, then I may get it too,
and that will be unfortunate because I will drag in a lot of very effective people." It was not the first
such letter he had written! And the unhurried search this letter initiated continued for five weeks, via
Kharkov, in order to discover who in St. Petersburg had written it. Andreyushkin's identity was not
established until February 28. On March 1, the bomb throwers, bombs in hand, were arrested on
Nevsky Prospekt just before the attempted assassination.]

The office of my interrogator, I.I.. Yezepov, was high-ceilinged, spacious and bright, with an
enormous window. (The Rossiya Insurance Company had not been built with torture in mind.) And,
putting to use its seventeen feet of height, a full-length, vertical, thirteen-foot portrait of that
powerful Sovereign hung there, toward whom I, grain of sand that I was, had expressed my hatred.
Sometimes the interrogator stood in front of the portrait and declaimed dramatically: "We are ready
to lay down our lives for him! We are ready to lie down in the path of oncoming tanks for his sake!"
Face to face with the altarlike grandeur of that portrait, my mumbling about some kind of purified
Leninism seemed pitiful, and I myself seemed a blasphemous slanderer deserving only death.

The contents of our letters provided more than enough, in keeping with the standards of those times,
to sentence us both. Therefore my interrogator did not have to invent anything. He merely tried to
cast his noose around everyone I had ever written to or received a letter from. I had expressed myself
vehemently in letters to friends my own age and had been almost reckless in spelling out seditious
ideas, but my friends for some reason had continued to correspond with me! And some suspicious
phrases could be found in their replies to my letters.

[One of our school friends was nearly arrested because of me at this time. It was an enormous relief
to me to learn later that he was still free! But then, twenty-two years later, he wrote to me: "On the
basis of your published works I conclude that you take a one-sided view of life. . . . Objectively
speaking, you have become the standard-bearer of Fascist reactionaries in the West, in West
Germany and the United States, for example. . . . Lenin, whom, I'm convinced, you love and honor
just as much as you used to, yes, and old Marx and Engels, too, would have condemned you in the
severest fashion. Think about that!" Indeed, I do think about that: How sorry I am that you didn't get
arrested then! How much you lost!]

And then Yezepov, like Porfiri Petrovich, demanded that I explain it all in a coherent way: if we had
expressed ourselves in such a fashion in letters that we knew were subject to censorship, what could
we have said to each other face to face? I could not convince him that all my fire-eating talk was
confined to my letters. And at that point, with muddled mind, I had to undertake to weave something
credible about my meetings with my friends — meetings referred to in my letters. What I said had to
jibe with the letters, in such a way as to be on the very edge of political matters and yet not fall under
that Criminal Code. Moreover, these explanations had to pour forth quickly, all in one breath, so as
to convince this veteran interrogator of my naivete, my humility, my total honesty. The main thing
was not to provoke my lazy interrogator to any interest in looking through that accursed load of stuff
I had brought in my accursed suitcase — including many notebooks of my "War Diary," written in
hard, light pencil in a needle-thin handwriting, with some of the notes already partially washed out.
These diaries constituted my claim to becoming a writer. I had not believed in the capacities of our
amazing memory, and throughout the war years I had tried to write down everything I saw. That
would have been only half a catastrophe: I also wrote down everything I heard from other people.
But opinions and stories which were so natural in front-line areas seemed to be treasonable here in
the rear and reeked of raw imprisonment for my front-line comrades. So to prevent that interrogator
from going to work on my "War Diary" and mining from it a whole case against a free front-Une
tribe, I repented just as much as I had to and pretended to see the light and reject my political
mistakes. I became utterly exhausted from this balancing on a razor's edge, until I recognized that no
one was being hauled in for a confrontation with me and distinguished the clear signs that the



interrogation was drawing to an end .. . until, in the fourth month, all the notebooks of my "War
Diary" were cast into the hellish maw of the Lubyanka furnace, where they burst into flame — the red
pyre of one more novel which had perished in Russia — and flew out of the highest chimney in black
butterflies of soot.

We used to walk in the shadow of that chimney, our exercise yard a boxlike concrete enclosure on
the roof of the Big Lubyanka, six floors up. The walls rose around us to approximately three times a
man's height. With our own ears we could hear Moscow — automobile horns honking back and forth.
But all we could see was that chimney, the guard posted in a seventh-floor tower, and that segment
of God's heaven whose unhappy fate it was to float over the Lubyanka.

Oh, that soot! It kept falling on and on in that first postwar May. So much of it fell during each of
our walks that we decided the Lubyanka must be burning countless years of files. My doomed diary
was only one momentary plume of that soot. I recalled a frosty sunny morning in March when I was
sitting in the interrogator's office. He was asking his customary crude questions and writing down
my answers, distorting my words as he did so. The sun played in the melting latticework of the frost
on the wide window, through which at times I felt very much like jumping, so as to flash through
Moscow at least in death and smash onto the sidewalk five floors below, just as, in my childhood,
my unknown predecessor had jumped from House 33 in Rostov-on-the-Don. In the gaps where the
frost had melted, the rooftops of Moscow could be seen, rooftop after rooftop, and above them merry
little puffs of smoke. But I was staring not in that direction but at a mound of piled-up manuscripts —
someone else's — covering the entire center of the floor in this half -empty room, thirty-six square
yards in area, manuscripts which had been dumped there a little while before and had not yet been
examined. In notebooks, in file folders, in homemade binders, in tied and untied bundles, and simply
in loose pages. The manuscripts lay there like the burial mound of some interred human spirit, its
conical top rearing higher than the interrogator's desk, almost blocking me from his view. And
brotherly pity ached in me for the labor of that unknown person who had been arrested the previous
night, these spoils from the search of his premises having been dumped that very morning on the
parquet floor of the torture chamber, at the feet of that thirteen-foot Stalin. I sat there and I
wondered: Whose extraordinary life had they brought in for torment, for dismemberment, and then
for burning?

Oh, how many ideas and works had perished in that building — a whole lost culture? Oh, soot, soot,
from the Lubyanka chimneys! And the most hurtful thing of all was that our descendants would
consider our generation more stupid, less gifted, less vocal than in actual fact it was.

One needs to have only two points in order to draw a straight line between them.

In 1920, as Ehrenburg recalls, the Cheka addressed him as follows:

"You prove to us that you are not Wrangel's agent."

And in 1950, one of the leading colonels of the MGB, Foma Fomich Zheleznov, said to his
prisoners: "We are not going to sweat to prove the prisoner's guilt to him. Let him prove to us that he
did not have hostile intent."

And along this cannibalistically artless straight line lie the recollections of countless millions.

What a speed-up and simplification of criminal investigation previously unknown to mankind! The
Organs altogether freed themselves of the burden of obtaining proof! Trembling and pale, the rabbit
who had been caught, deprived of the right to write anyone, phone anyone, bring anything with him
from freedom, deprived too of sleep, food, paper, pencils, and even buttons, seated on a bare stool in
the comer of an office, had to try to find out for himself and display to that loafer of an interrogator
proof that he did not have hostile intentions. If he could not discover such proof (and where would



he find it?), by that very failure he provided the interrogation with approximate proof of his guilt!

I knew of a case in which a certain old man who had been a prisoner in Germany managed
nonetheless, sitting there on his bare stool and gesturing with his cold fingers, to prove to his
monster of an interrogator that he did not betray his Motherland and even that he did not have any
such intention! It was a scandal! And what happened? Did they free him? Of course not — after all,
he told me about this in Butyrki and not on Tverskoi Boulevard in the middle of Moscow. At that
point a second interrogator joined the first and they spent a quiet evening reminisc- ing with the old
man. Then the two interrogators signed witnesses' affidavits stating that in the course of the evening
the hungry, sleepy old man had engaged in anti-Soviet propaganda! Things were said innocently —
but they weren't listened to innocently. The old man was then turned over to a third interrogator, who
quashed the treason indictment and neatly nailed him with that very same tenner for Anti-Soviet
Agitation during his interrogation.

Given that interrogations had ceased to be an attempt to get at the truth, for the interrogators in
difficult cases they became a mere exercise of their duties as executioners and in easy cases simply a
pastime and a basis for receiving a salary.

And easy cases always existed, even in the notorious year 1937. For example, Borodko was accused
of having visited his parents in Poland sixteen years before without having a passport for foreign
travel. (His papa and mama lived all of ten versts — six miles — away, but the diplomats had signed
away that part of Byelorussia to Poland, and in 1921 people had not yet gotten used to that fact and
went back and forth as they pleased.) The interrogation took just an hour.

Question: Did you go there?

Answer: I did.

Question: How?

Answer: Horseback, of course.

Conclusion: Take ten years for KRD.

[KRD = Counter-Revolutionary Activity.]

But that sort of pace smells of the Stakhanovite movement, a movement which found no disciples
among the bluecaps. According to the Code of Criminal Procedure every interrogation was supposed
to take two months. And if it presented difficulties, one was allowed to ask the prosecutor for several
continuations of a month apiece (which, of course, the prosecutors never refused). Thus it would
have been stupid to risk one's health, not to take advantage of these postponements, and, speaking in
factory terms, to raise one's work norms. Having worked with voice and fist in the initial assault
week of every interrogation, and thereby expended one's will and character (as per Vyshinsky), the
interrogators had a vital interest in dragging out the remainder of every case as long as possible. That
way more old, subdued cases were on hand and fewer new ones. It was considered just indecent to
complete a political interrogation in two months.

The state system itself suffered from its own lack of trust and from its rigidity. These interrogators
were selected personnel, but they weren't trusted either. In all probability they, too, were required to
check in on arriving and check out on leaving, and the prisoners were, of course, checked in and out
when called for questioning. What else could the interrogators do to keep the bookkeepers' accounts
straight? They would summon one of their defendants, sit him down in a comer, ask him some
terrifying question — and then forget about him while they themselves sat for a long time reading the
paper, writing an outline for a political indoctrination course or personal letters, or went off to visit
one another, leaving guards to act as watchdogs in their place. Peacefully batting the breeze on the
sofa with a colleague who had just dropped in, the interrogator would come to himself once in a
while, look threateningly at the accused, and say:



"Now there's a rat! There's a real rat for you! Well, that's all right, we'll not be stingy about his nine
grams!"

My interrogator also made frequent use of the telephone. For example, he used to phone home and
tell his wife — with his sparkling eyes directed at me — that he was going to be working all night long
so she mustn't expect him before morning. (My heart, of course, fell. That meant he would be
working me over all night long!) But then he would immediately dial the phone number of his
mistress and, in purring tones, make a date with her for the night. (So: I would be able to get some
sleep! I felt relieved.)

Thus it was that the faultless system was moderated only by the shortcomings of those who carried it
out.

Certain of the more curious interrogators used to enjoy using "empty" interrogations to broaden their
knowledge of life. They might ask the accused prisoner about the front (about those very German
tanks beneath which they never quite managed to find the time to throw themselves). Or perhaps
about the customs of European countries and lands across the sea which the prisoner had visited:
about the stores and the merchandise sold in them, and particularly about procedures in foreign
whorehouses and about all kinds of adventures with women.

The Code of Criminal Procedure provided that the prosecutor was to review continuously the course
of every interrogation to ensure its being conducted correctly. But no one in our time ever saw him
face to face until the so-called "questioning by the prosecutor," which meant the interrogation was
nearing its end. I, too, was taken to such a "questioning." Lieutenant Colonel Kotov, a calm, well-
nourished, impersonal blond man, who was neither nasty nor nice but essentially a cipher, sat behind
his desk and, yawning, examined for the first time the file on my case. He spent fifteen minutes
acquainting himself with it while I watched. (Since this "questioning" was quite unavoidable and
since it was also recorded, there would have been no sense at all in his studying the file at some
earlier, unrecorded time and then having had to remember details of the case for a certain number of
hours.) Finally, he raised his indifferent eyes to stare at the wall and asked lazily what I wanted to
add to my testimony.

He was required by law to ask what complaints I had about the conduct of the interrogation and
whether coercion had been used or any violations of my legal rights had occurred. But it had been a
long time since prosecutors asked such questions. And what if they had? After all, the existence of
that entire Ministry building with its thousands of rooms, and of all five thousand of the Ministry's
other interrogation buildings, railroad cars, caves, and dugouts scattered throughout the Soviet
Union, was based on violations of legal rights. And it certainly wasn't up to Lieutenant Colonel
Kotov and me to reverse that whole process.

Anyway, all the prosecutors of any rank at all held their positions with the approval of that very
same State Security which . . . they were supposed to check up on.

His own wilted state, his lack of combativeness, and his fatigue from all those endless stupid cases
were somehow transmitted to me. So I didn't raise questions of truth with him. I requested only that
one too obvious stupidity be corrected: two of us had been indicted in the same case, but our
interrogations were conducted in different places — mine in Moscow and my friend's at the front.
Therefore I was processed singly, yet charged under Section 11 — in other words, as a group, an
organization. As persuasively as possible, I requested him to cancel this additional charge under
Section 11.

He leafed through the case for another five minutes, sighed, spread out his hands, and said:
"What's there to say? One person is a person and two persons are ... people."



But one person and a half — is that an organization?

And he pushed the button for them to come and take me away. Soon after that, late one evening in
late May, in that same office with a sculptured bronze clock on the marble mantel, my interrogator
summoned me for a "206" procedure. This was, in accordance with the provisions of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, the defendant's review of the case before his final signature. Not doubting for
one moment that I would sign, the interrogator was already seated, writing the conclusion of the
indictment.

I opened the cover of the thick file, and there, on the inside of the cover in printed text, I read an
astonishing statement. It turned out that during the interrogation I had had the right to make written
complaints against anything improper in its conduct, and that the interrogator was obliged to staple
these complaints into my record! During the interrogation! Not at its end.

Alas, not one of the thousands with whom I was later imprisoned had been aware of this right.

I turned more pages. I saw photocopies of my own letters and a totally distorted interpretation of
their meaning by unknown commentators (like Captain Libin). I saw the hyperbolized lie in which
Captain Yezepov had wrapped up my careful testimony. And, last but not least, I saw the idiocy
whereby I, one individual, was accused as a "group" !

"I won't sign," I said, without much firmness. "You conducted the interrogation improperly."

"All right then, let's begin it all over again!" Maliciously he compressed his lips. "We'll send you off
to the place where we keep the Polizei."

He even stretched out his hand as though to take the file away from me. (At that point I held onto it.)

Somewhere outside the fifth-floor windows of the Lubyanka, the golden sunset sun glowed.
Somewhere it was May. The office windows, like all the windows facing outward, were tightly
closed and had not yet been unsealed after the winter — so that fresh air and the fragrance of things in
bloom should not creep into those hidden rooms. The bronze clock on the mantel, from which the
last rays of the sun had disappeared, quietly chimed.

Begin all over again? It seemed to me it would be easier to die than to begin all over again. Ahead of
me loomed at least some kind of life. (If I had only known what kind!) And then what about that
place where they kept the Polizei? And, in general, it was a bad idea to make him angry. It would
influence the tone in which he phrased the conclusion of the indictment.

And so I signed. I signed it complete with Section 1 1, the significance of which I did not then know.
They told me only that it would not add to my prison term. But because of that Section 111 was later
put into a hard-labor camp. Because of that Section 111 was sent, even after "liberation," and
without any additional sentence, into eternal exile.

Maybe it was all for the best. Without both those experiences, I would not have written this book.

My interrogator had used no methods on me other than sleeplessness, lies, and threats — all
completely legal. Therefore, in the course of the "206" procedure, he didn't have to shove at me — as
did interrogators who had made a mess of things and wanted to play safe — a document on
nondisclosure for me to sign: that I, the undersigned, under pain of criminal penalty, swore never to
tell anyone about the methods used in conducting my interrogation. (No one knows, incidentally,
what article of the Code this comes under.)

In several of the provincial administrations of the NKVD this measure was carried out in sequence:



the typed statement on nondisclosure was shoved at a prisoner along with the verdict of the OSO.
And later a similar document was shoved at prisoners being released from camp, whereby they
guaranteed never to disclose to anyone the state of affairs in camp.

And so? Our habit of obedience, our bent (or broken) backbone, did not suffer us either to reject this
gangster method of burying loose ends or even to be enraged by it.

We have lost the measure of freedom. We have no means of determining where it begins and where
it ends. We are an Asiatic people. On and on and on they go, taking from us those endless pledges of
nondisclosure — everyone not too lazy to ask for them.

By now we are even unsure whether we have the right to talk about the events of our own lives.

Chapter 4
The Bluecaps

Throughout the grinding of our souls in the gears of the great Nighttime Institution, when our souls
are pulverized and our flesh hangs down in tatters like a beggar's rags, we suffer too much and are
too immersed in our own pain to rivet with penetrating and far-seeing gaze those pale night
executioners who torture us. A surfeit of inner grief floods our eyes.

Otherwise what historians of our torturers we would be! For it is certain they will never describe
themselves as they actually are. But alas! Every former prisoner remembers his own interrogation in
detail, how they squeezed him, and what foulness they squeezed out of him — but often he does not
even remember their names, let alone think about them as human beings. So it is with me. I can
recall much more — and much more that's interesting — about any one of my cellmates than I can
about Captain of State Security Yezepov, with whom I spent no little time face to face, the two of us
alone in his office.

There is one thing, however, which remains with us all as an accurate, generalized recollection: foul
rot — a space totally infected with putrefaction. And even when, decades later, we are long past fits of
anger or outrage, in our own quieted hearts we retain this firm impression of low, malicious,
impious, and, possibly, muddled people.

There is an interesting story about Alexander II, the Tsar surrounded by revolutionaries, who were to
make seven attempts on his life. He once visited the House of Preliminary Detention on
Shpalernaya — the uncle of the Big House — where he ordered them to lock him up in solitary-
confinement cell No. 227. He stayed in it for more than an hour, attempting thereby to sense the state
of mind of those he had imprisoned there.

One cannot but admit that for a monarch this was evidence of moral aspiration, to feel the need and
make the effort to take a spiritual view of the matter.

But it is impossible to picture any of our interrogators, right up to Abakumov and Beria, wanting to
slip into a prisoner's skin even for one hour, or feeling compelled to sit and meditate in solitary
confinement.

Their branch of service does not require them to be educated people of broad culture and broad
views — and they are not. Their branch of service does not require them to think logically — and they
do not. Their branch of service requires only that they carry out orders exactly and be impervious to
suffering — and that is what they do and what they are. We who have passed through their hands feel
suffocated when we think of that legion, which is stripped bare of universal human ideals.



Although others might not be aware of it, it was clear to the interrogators at least that the cases were
fabricated. Except at staff conferences, they could not seriously say to one another or to themselves
that they were exposing criminals. Nonetheless they kept right on producing depositions page after
page to make sure that we rotted. So the essence of it all turns out to be the credo of the blatnye — the
underworld of Russian thieves: "You today; me tomorrow."

They understood that the cases were fabricated, yet they kept on working year after year. How could
they? Either they forced themselves not to think (and this in itself means the ruin of a human being),
and simply accepted that this was the way it had to be and that the person who gave them their orders
was always right. . .

But didn't the Nazis, too, it comes to mind, argue that same way?

[There is no way of sidestepping this comparison: both the years and the methods coincide too
closely. And the comparison occurred even more naturally to those who had passed through the
hands of both the Gestapo and the MGB. One of these was Yevgeny Ivanovich Divnich, an emigre
and preacher of Orthodox Christianity. The Gestapo accused him of Communist activities among
Russian workers in Germany, and the MGB charged him with having ties to the international
bourgeoisie. Divnich's verdict was unfavorable to the MGB. He was tortured by both, but the
Gestapo was nonetheless trying to get at the truth, and when the accusation did not hold up, Divnich
was released. The MGB wasn't interested in the truth and had no intention of letting anyone out of its
grip once he was arrested.]

Or else it was a matter of the Progressive Doctrine, the granite ideology. An interrogator in awful

Orotukan — sent there to the Kolyma in 1938 as a penalty assignment — was so touched when M.
Lurye, former director of the Krivoi Rog Industrial Complex, readily agreed to sign an indictment
which meant a second camp term that he used the time they had thus saved to say: "You think we get
any satisfaction from using persuasion?

[An affectionate term for torture.}

We have to do what the Party demands of us. You are an old Party member. Tell me what would you

do in my place?" Apparently Lurye nearly agreed with him, and it may have been the fact that he had
already been thinking in some such terms that led him to sign so readily. It is after all a convincing
argument.

But most often it was merely a matter of cynicism. The bluecaps understood the workings of the
meat grinder and loved it. In the Dzhida camps in 1944, interrogator Mironenko said to the
condemned Babich with pride in his faultless logic: "Interrogation and trial are merely judicial
corroboration. They cannot alter your fate, which was previously decided. If it is necessary to shoot
you, then you will be shot even if you are altogether innocent. If it is necessary to acquit you, then no
matter how guilty you are you will be cleared and acquitted."

[This evidently refers to their own people.]

Kushnaryev, Chief of the First Investigation Department of the West Kazakhstan Provincial State
Security Administration, laid it on the line in just that way to Adolf Tsivilko. "After all, we're not
going to let you out if you're a Leningrader!" (In other words, a Communist Party member with
seniority.)

"Just give us a person — and we'll create the case!" That was what many of them said jokingly, and it
was their slogan. What we think of as torture they think of as good work. The wife of the
interrogator Nikolai Grabishchenko (the Volga Canal Project) said touchingly to her neighbors:
"Kolya is a very good worker. One of them didn't confess for a long time — and they gave him to



Kolya. Kolya talked with him for one night and he confessed."

What prompted them all to slip into harness and pursue so zealously not truth but totals of the
processed and condemned? Because it was most comfortable for them not to be different from the
others. And because these totals meant an easy life, supplementary pay, awards and decorations,
promotions in rank, and the expansion and prosperity of the Organs themselves. If they ran up high
totals, they could loaf when they felt like it, or do poor work or go out and enjoy themselves at night.
And that is just what they did. Low totals led to their being kicked out, to the loss of their feedbag.
For Stalin could never be convinced that in any district, or city, or military unit, he might suddenly
cease to have enemies.

That was why they felt no mercy, but, instead, an explosion of resentment and rage toward those
maliciously stubborn prisoners who opposed being fitted into the totals, who would not capitulate to
sleeplessness or the punishment cell or hunger. By refusing to confess they menaced the
interrogator's personal standing. It was as though they wanted to bring him down. In such
circumstances all measures were justified! If it's to be war, then war it will be! We'll ram the tube
down your throat — swallow that salt water!

Excluded by the nature of their work and by deliberate choice from the higher sphere of human
existence, the servitors of the Blue Institution lived in their lower sphere with all the greater intensity
and avidity. And there they were possessed and directed by the two strongest instincts of the lower
sphere, other than hunger and sex: greed for power and greed for gain. (Particularly for power. In
recent decades it has turned out to be more important than money.)

Power is a poison well known for thousands of years. If only no one were ever to acquire material
power over others! But to the human being who has faith in some force that holds dominion over all
of us, and who is therefore conscious of his own limitations, power is not necessarily fatal. For those,
however, who are unaware of any higher sphere, it is a deadly poison. For them there is no antidote.

Remember what Tolstoi said about power? Ivan Ilyich had accepted an official position which gave
him authority to destroy any person he wanted to! All without exception were in his hands, and
anyone, even the most important, could be brought before him as an accused. (And that is just where
our blueboys are! There is nothing to add to the description.) The consciousness of this power (and
"the possibilities of using it mercifully" — so Tolstoi qualifies the situation, but this does not in any
way apply to our boys) constituted for Ivan Ilyich the chief interest and attraction of the service.

But attraction is not the right word — it is intoxication! After all, it is intoxicating. You are still
young — still, shall we say parenthetically, a sniveling youth. Only a little while ago your parents
were deeply concerned about you and didn't know where to turn to launch you in life. You were such
a fool you didn't even want to study, but you got through three years of that school — and then how
you took off and flew! How your situation changed! How your gestures changed, your glance, the
turn of your head! The learned council of the scientific institute is in session. You enter and every-
one notices you and trembles. You don't take the chairman's chair. Those headaches are for the rector
to take on. You sit off to one side, but everyone understands that you are head man there. You are
the Special Department. And you can sit there for just five minutes and then leave. You have that
advantage over the professors. You can be called away by more important business — but later on,
when you're considering their decision, you will raise your eyebrows or, better still, purse your lips
and say to the rector:

"You can't do that. There are special considerations involved."

That's all! And it won't be done. Or else you are an osobist — a State Security representative in the
army — a SMERSH man, and a mere lieutenant; but the portly old colonel, the commander of the
unit, stands up when you enter the room and tries to flatter you, to play up to you. He doesn't even



have a drink with his chief of staff without inviting you to join them. The fact that you have only two
tiny stars on your shoulder boards doesn't mean a thing; it is even amusing. After all, your stars have
a very different weight and are measured on a totally different scale from those of ordinary officers.
(On special assignments you are sometimes even authorized to wear major's insignia, for example,
which is a sort of incognito, a convention.) You have a power over all the people in that military
unit, or factory, or district, incomparably greater than that of the military commander, or factory
director, or secretary of the district Communist Party. These men control people's military or official
duties, wages, reputations, but you control people's freedom. And no one dares speak about you at
meetings, and no one will ever dare write about you in the newspaper — not only something bad but
anything good! They don't dare. Your name, like that of a jealously guarded deity, cannot even be
mentioned. You are there; everyone feels your presence; but it's as though you didn't exist. From the
moment you don that heavenly blue service cap, you stand higher than the publicly acknowledged
power. No one dares check up on what you do. But no one is exempt from your checking up on him.
And therefore, in dealing with ordinary so-called citizens, who for you are mere blocks of wood, it is
altogether appropriate for you to wear an ambiguous and deeply thoughtful expression. For, of
course, you are the one — and no one else — who knows about the special considerations. And
therefore you are always right.

There is just one thing you must never forget. You, too, would have been just such a poor block of
wood if you had not had the luck to become one of the little links in the Organs — that flexible,
unitary organism inhabiting a nation as a tapeworm inhabits a human body. Everything is yours now!
Everything is for you! Just be true to the Organs! They will always stand up for you! They will help
you swallow up anyone who bothers you! They will help move every obstacle from your path! But —
be true to the Organs! Do everything they order you to! They will do the thinking for you in respect
to your functions too: today you serve in a special unit; tomorrow you will sit in an interrogator's
armchair; and then perhaps you will travel to Lake Seliger as a folklorist, partly, it may be, to get
your nerves straightened out.

[Ilin in 1931.]

And next you may be sent from a city where you are too well known to the opposite end of the
country as a Plenipotentiary in Charge of Church Affairs.

[The violent Yaroslavl interrogator Volkopyalov, appointed Plenipotentiary in Charge of Church
Affairs in Moldavia.]

Or perhaps you will become Executive Secretary of the Union of Soviet Writers.

[Another Ilin — this one Viktor Nikolayevich, a former lieutenant general of State Security.]

Be surprised at nothing. People's true appointments and true ranks are known only to the Organs.
The rest is merely play-acting. Some Honored Artist or other, or Hero of Socialist Agriculture, is
here today, and tomorrow, puff! he's gone.

["Who are you?" asked General Serov in Berlin of the world-renowned biologist Timofeyev-
Ressovsky, offensively using the familiar form of address. And the scientist, who was undismayed
and who possessed a Cossack's hereditary daring, replied, using the same familiar form: "And who
are you?" Serov corrected himself and, this time using the formal and correct form, asked: "Are you
a scientist?"]

The duties of an interrogator require work, of course: you have to come in during the day, at night,
sit for hours and hours — but not split your skull over "proof." (Let the prisoner's head ache over
that.) And you don't have to worry whether the prisoner is guilty or not but simply do what the
Organs require. And everything will be all right. It will be up to you to make the interrogation



periods pass as pleasurably as possible and not to get overly fatigued. And it would be nice to get
some good out of it — at least to amuse yourself. You have been sitting a long time, and all of a
sudden a new method of persuasion occurs to you! Eureka! So you call up your friends on the
phone, and you go around to other offices and tell them about it — what a laugh! Who shall we try it
on, boys? It's really pretty monotonous to keep doing the same thing all the time. Those trembling
hands, those imploring eyes, that cowardly submissiveness — they are really a bore. If you could just
get one of them to resist! "I love strong opponents! It's such fun to break their backs!" said the
Leningrad interrogator Shitov to G. G v.

And if your opponent is so strong that he refuses to give in, all your methods have failed, and you are
in a rage? Then don't control your fury! It's tremendously satisfying, that outburst! Let your anger
have its way; don't set any bounds to it! Don't hold yourself back! That's when interrogators spit in
the open mouth of the accused! And shove his face into a full cuspidor!

[As happened with Vasilyev, according to Ivanov-Razumnik.]

That's the state of mind in which they drag priests around by their long hair! Or urinate in a kneeling
prisoner's face! After such a storm of fury you feel yourself a real honest-to-God man!

Or else you are interrogating a "foreigner's girl friend." So you curse her out and then you say:

"Come on now, does an American have a special kind of ? Is that it? Weren't there enough

Russian ones for you?" And all of a sudden you get an idea: maybe she learned something from
those foreigners. Here's a chance not to be missed, like an assignment abroad! And so you begin to
interrogate her energetically: How? What positions? More! In detail! Every scrap of information!
(You can use the information yourself, and you can tell the other boys too!) The girl is blushing all
over and in tears. "It doesn't have anything to do with the case," she protests. "Yes, it does, speak
up!" That's power for you! She gives you the full details. If you want, she'll draw a picture for you. If
you want, she'll demonstrate with her body. She has no way out. In your hands you hold the punish-
ment cell and her prison term.

And if you have asked for a stenographer to take down the questions and answers, and they send in a
pretty one, you can shove your paw down into her bosom right in front of the boy being interrogated.

[Interrogator Pokhilko, Kemerovo State Security Administration.]

He's not a human being after all, and there is no reason to feel shy in his presence.

In fact, there's no reason for you to feel shy with anyone. And if you like the broads — and who
doesn't? — you'd be a fool not to make use of your position. Some will be drawn to you because of
your power, and others will give in out of fear. So you've met a girl somewhere and she's caught
your eye? She'll belong to you, never fear; she can't get away! Someone else's wife has caught your
eye? She'll be yours too! Because, after all, there's no prob- lem about removing the husband.

[For a long time I've been hanging on to a theme for a story to be called "The Spoiled Wife." But it
looks as though I will never get the chance to write it, so here it is. In a certain Far Eastern aviation
unit before the Korean War, a certain lieutenant colonel returned from an assignment to find his wife
in a hospital. The doctors did not hide the truth from him: her sexual organs had been injured by
perverted sexual practices. The lieutenant colonel got in to see his wife and wrung from her the
admission that the man responsible was the osobist in their unit, a senior lieutenant. (It would seem,
by the way, that this incident had not occurred without some cooperation on her part.) In a rage the
lieutenant colonel ran to the osobist's office, took out his pistol, and threatened to kill him. But the
senior lieutenant very quickly forced him to back down and leave the office defeated and pitiful. He
threatened to send the lieutenant colonel to rot in the most horrible of camps, where he'd pray to be
released from life without further torment, and he ordered him to take his wife back just as he found



her — with an injury that was to some extent incurable — and to live with her, not to dare get a
divorce, and not to dare complain. And all this was the price for not being arrested! The lieutenant
colonel did just as he was ordered. (I was told the story by the osobist's chauffeur.)

There must have been many such cases, because the abuse of power was par- ticularly attractive in
this area. In 1944, another gaybist — State Security officer — forced the daughter of an army general
to marry him by threatening to arrest her father. The girl had a fiance, but to save her father she
married the gaybist. She kept a diary during her brief marriage, gave it to her true love, and then
committed suicide.]

No, indeed! To know what it meant to be a bluecap one had to experience it! Anything you saw was
yours! Any apartment you looked at was yours! Any woman was yours! Any enemy was struck from
your path! The earth beneath your feet was yours! The heaven above you was yours — it was, after
all, like your cap, sky blue!

The passion for gain was their universal passion. After all, in the absence of any checking up, such
power was inevitably used for personal enrichment. One would have had to be holy to refrain!

If we were able to discover the hidden motivation behind in- dividual arrests, we would be astounded
to find that, granted the rules governing arrests in general, 75 percent of the time the particular
choice of whom to arrest, the personal cast of the die, was determined by human greed and
vengefulness; and of that 75 percent, half were the result of material self-interest on the part of the
local NKVD (and, of course, the prosecutor too, for on this point I do not distinguish between them).

How, for example, did V. G. Vlasov's nineteen-year-long journey through the Archipelago begin? As
head of the District Consumer Cooperatives he arranged a sale of textiles for the activists of the local
Party organization. (These materials were of a sort and quality which no one nowadays would even
touch.) No one was bothered, of course, by the fact that this sale was not open to the general public.
But the prosecutor's wife was unable to buy any: She wasn't there at the time; Prosecutor Rusov him-
self had been shy about approaching the counter; and Vlasov hadn't thought to say: "I'll set some
aside for you." (In fact, given his character, he would never have said this anyway.) Further- more.
Prosecutor Rusov had invited a friend to dine in the re- stricted Party dining room — such restricted
dining rooms used to exist in the thirties. This friend of his was not high enough in rank to be
admitted there, and the dining room manager refused to serve him. The prosecutor demanded that
Vlasov punish the man- ager, and Vlasov refused. Vlasov also managed to insult the dis- trict
NKVD, and just as painfully. And he was therefore added to the rightist opposition.

The motivations and actions of the bluecaps are sometimes so petty that one can only be astounded.
Security officer Senchenko took a map case and dispatch case from an officer he'd arrested and
started to use them right in his presence, and, by manipu- lating the documentation, he took a pair of
foreign gloves from another prisoner. (When the armies were advancing, the bluecaps were
especially irritated because they got only second pick of the booty.) The counterintelligence officer
of the Forty-ninth Army who arrested me had a yen for my cigarette case — and it wasn't even a
cigarette case but a small German Army box, of a tempting scarlet, however. And because of that
piece of shit he carried out a whole maneuver: As his first step, he omitted it from the list of
belongings that were confiscated from me. ("You can keep it.") He thereupon ordered me to be
searched again, knowing all the time that it was all I had in my pockets. "Aha! what's that? Take it
away!" And to prevent my protests: "Put him in the punish- ment cell!" (What Tsarist gendarme
would have dared behave that way toward a defender of the Fatherland?)

Every interrogator was given an allowance of a certain number of cigarettes to encourage those
willing to confess and to reward stool pigeons. Some of them kept all the cigarettes for themselves.

Even in accounting for hours spent in interrogating, they used to cheat. They got higher pay for night



work. And we used to note the way they wrote down more hours on the night interroga- tions than
they really spent.

Interrogator Fyodorov (Reshety Station, P. O. Box No. 235) stole a wristwatch while searching the
apartment of the free person Korzukhin. During the Leningrad blockade Interrogator Nikolai
Fyodorovich Kruzhkov told Yelizaveta Viktorovna Strakhovich, wife of the prisoner he was
interrogating, K. I. Strakhovich: "I want a quilt. Bring it to me!" When she replied: "All our warm
things are in the room they've sealed," he went to her apart- ment and, without breaking the State
Security seal on the lock, unscrewed the entire doorknob. "That's how the MGB works," he
explained gaily. And he went in and began to collect the warm things, shoving some crystal in his
pocket at the same time. She herself tried to get whatever she could out of the room, but he stopped
her. "That's enough for you!" — and he kept on raking in the booty.

[In 1954, although her husband, who had forgiven them everything, in- eluding a death sentence that
had been commuted, kept trying to persuade her not to pursue the matter, this energetic and
implacable woman testified against Kruzhkov at a trial. Because this was not Kruzhkov's first
offense, and because the interests of the Organs had been violated, he was given a twenty-five-year
sentence. Has he really been in the jug that long?]

There's no end to such cases. One could issue a thousand "White Papers" (and beginning in 1918
too). One would need only to question systematically former prisoners and their wives. Maybe there
are and were bluecaps who never stole anything or appropriated anything for themselves — but I find
it impossible to imagine one. I simply do not understand: given the bluecaps' philosophy of life, what
was there to restrain them if they liked some particular thing? Way back at the beginning of the
thirties, when all of us were marching around in the German uniforms of the Red Youth Front and
were building the First Five- Year Plan, they were spending their evenings in salons like the one in
the apartment of Konkordiya losse, behaving like members of the nobility or Westerners, and their
lady friends were showing off their foreign clothes. Where were they getting those clothes?

Here are their family names — and one might almost think they were hired because of those names.
For example, in the Kemerovo Provincial State Security Administration, there were: a prosecutor
named Trutnev, "drone"; a chief of the interroga- tion section Major Shkurkin, "self-server"; his
deputy, Lieutenant Colonel Balandin, "soupy"; and an interrogator Skorokhvatov, "quick- grabber."
When all is said and done, one could not invent names more appropriate. And they were all right
there together! (I need hardly bother to mention again Volkopyalov — "wolf- skin-stretcher" — or
Grabishchenko — "plunderer.") Are we to assume that nothing at all is expressed in people's family
names and such a concentration of them?

Again the prisoner's faulty memory. I. Komeyev has forgotten the name of the colonel of State

Security who was also Kon- kordiya fosse's friend (they both knew her, it turned out), who was in
the Vladimir Detention Prison at the same time as Korneyev. This colonel was a living embodiment
of the instincts for power and personal gain. At the beginning of 1945, during the height of the "war
booty" period, he got himself assigned to that section of the Organs, headed by Abakumov himself,
which was supposed to keep watch over the plundering — in other words, they tried to grab off as
much as possible for themselves, not for the state. (And succeeded brilliantly.) Our hero pulled in
whole freight car loads and built several dachas, one of them in Klin. After the war he operated on
such a scale that when he arrived at the Novosibirsk Station he ordered all the customers chased out
of the station restaurant and had girls and women rounded up and forced to dance naked on the tables
to entertain him and his drinking companions. He would have gotten away with this too, but he
violated another important rule. Like Kruzh- kov, he went against his own kind. Kruzhkov deceived
the Organs. And this colonel did perhaps even worse. He laid bets on which wives he could seduce,
and not just ordinary wives, but the wives of his colleagues in the Security police. And he was not
forgiven! He was sentenced to a political prison under Article 58, and was serving out his time
fuming at their having dared to arrest him. He had no doubt they would change their minds. (And



perhaps they did.)

That dread fate — to be thrown into prison themselves — was not such a rarity for the bluecaps. There
was no genuine insur- ance against it. But somehow these men were slow to sense the les- sons of
the past. Once again this was probably due to their hav- ing no higher powers of reason; their low-
grade intellect would tell them: It happens only rarely; very few get caught; it may pass me by; my
friends won't let me down.

Friends, as a matter of fact, did try not to leave their friends in a bad spot. They had their own
unspoken understanding: at least to arrange favorable conditions fox friends. (This was the case, for
example, with Colonel I. Y. Vorobyev in the Marfino Special Prison, and with the same V. N. Ilin
who was in the Lubyanka for more than eight years.) Thanks to this caste spirit, those arrested
singly, as a result of only personal shortcomings, usually did not do too badly. And that was how
they were able to justify their sense of immunity from punishment in their day- to-day work in the
service. But there were several known cases when camp Security officers were tossed into ordinary
camps to serve out their sentences. There were even instances when as prisoners they ran into zeks
who had once been under their thumb and came off badly in the encounter. For example, Security of-
ficer Munshin, who cherished a particularly violent hatred toward the 58's in camp and had relied
heavily on the support of the blatnye, the habitual thieves, was driven right under the board bunks by
those very same thieves. However, we have no way to learn more details about these cases in order
to be able to explain them.

But those gaybisty — the State Security officers — who got caught in a wave were in very serious
danger. (They had their own waves!) A wave is a natural catastrophe and is even more power- ful
than the Organs themselves. In this situation, no one was going to help anyone else lest he be drawn
into the same abyss him- self.

The possibility did exist, however, if you were well informed and had a sharp Chekist sensitivity, of
getting yourself out from under the avalanche, even at the last minute, by proving that you had no
connection with it. Thus it was that Captain Sayenko (not the Kharkov Chekist carpenter of 1918-
1919, who was famous for executing prisoners with his pistol, punching holes in bodies with his
saber, breaking shinbones in two, flattening heads with weights, and branding people with hot irons,
but, perhaps, a rel- ative) was weak enough to marry for love an ex-employee of the Chinese Eastern
Railroad named Kokhanskaya. And suddenly he found out, right at the beginning of the wave, that
all the Chinese Eastern Railroad people were going to be arrested. At this time he was head of the
Security Operations Department of the Arch- angel GPU. He acted without losing a moment. How?
He arrested his own beloved wife! And not on the basis of her being one of the Chinese Eastern
Railroad people — but on the basis of a case he himself cooked up. Not only did he save himself, but
he moved up and became the Chief of the Tomsk Province NKVD.

[This, too, is a theme for a story — and how many more there are in this field! Maybe someone will
make use of them someday.]

The waves were generated by the Organs' hidden law of self- renewal — a small periodic ritual
sacrifice so that the rest could take on the appearance of being purified. The Organs had to change
personnel faster than the normal rate of human growth and aging would ensure. Driven by that same
implacable urgency that forces the sturgeon to swim upriver and perish in the shallows, to be
replaced by schools of small fry, a certain number of "schools" of gaybisty had to sacrifice
themselves. This law was easily apparent to a higher intelligence, but the bluecaps them- selves did
not want to accept the fact of its existence and make provision for it. Yet, at the hour appointed in
their stars, the kings of the Organs, the aces of the Organs, and even the minis- ters themselves laid
their heads down beneath their own guil- lotine.

Yagoda took one such school of fish along with him. No doubt many of those whose glorious names



we shall come to admire when we come to the White Sea Canal were taken in this school and their
names thenceforward expunged from the poetic eulogies.

Very shortly, a second school accompanied the short-lived Yezhov. Some of the finest cavaliers of
1937 vanished in this one. (Yet one ought not to exaggerate their number. It did not by any means
include all the best.) Yezhov himself was beaten during his interrogation. He was pitiful. And Gulag
was orphaned dur- ing this wave of arrests. For example, arrested with Yezhov were the Chief of the
Financial Administration of Gulag, the Chief of the Medical Administration of Gulag, the Chief of
the Guard Service of Gulag (VOKhR), [VOKhR: Militarized Guard Service, formerly the Internal
Guard Service of the Republic. ] and even the Chief of the Security Operations Department of Gulag,
who oversaw the work of the camp "godfathers."

And later there was the school of Beria.

The corpulent, conceited Abakumov had fallen earlier, sepa- rately.

Someday — if the archives are not destroyed — ^the historians of the Organs will recount all this step
by step, with all the figures and all the glittering names.

Therefore, I am going to write only briefly about Ryumin and Abakumov, a story I learned only by
chance. I will not repeat what I have already written about them in The First Circle.

Ryumin had been raised to the heights by Abakumov and was very close to him. At the end of 1952,
he came to Abakumov with the sensational report that Professor Etinger, a physician, had confessed
to intentional malpractice when treating Zhdanov and Shcherbakov, with the purpose of killing them.
Abakumov re- fused to believe him. He knew the whole cookery and decided Ryumin was getting
too big for his britches. (But Ryumin had a better idea of what Stalin wanted!) To verify the story,
they arranged to cross-question Etinger that very evening. But each of them drew different
conclusions from his testimony. Abakumov concluded that there was no such thing as a "doctors'
case." And Ryumin concluded that there was. A second attempt at verifica- tion was to take place the
following morning, but, thanks to the miraculous attributes of the Nighttime Institution, Etinger died
that very night! In the morning, Ryumin, bypassing Abakumov and without his knowledge,
telephoned the Central Committee and asked for an appointment with Stalin! (My own opinion,
however, is that this was not his most decisive step. Ryumin's decisive action, following which his
life hung in the balance, was in not going along with Abakumov earlier. And perhaps in hav- ing
Etinger killed that same night. Who knows the secrets of those courtyards! Had Ryumin's contact
with Stalin begun earlier perhaps?) Stalin received Ryumin, set in motion the "doctors' case" and
arrested Abakumov. From that point on it would seem that Ryumin conducted the "doctors' case"
independently of and even despite Beria! There were signs before Stalin's death that Beria was in
danger — and perhaps it was he who arranged to have Stalin done away with. One of the first acts of
the new government was to dismiss the "doctors' case." At that time Ryumin was arrested (while
Beria was still in power), hut Abakumov was not released! At the Lubyanka a new order of things
was introduced. And for the first time in its entire existence a prosecutor crossed its threshold — D.
Terekhov. Imprisoned, Ryumin was fidgety and subservient: "I am not guilty. I am here for no
reason." He asked to be interrogated. As was his custom, he was sucking a hard candy at the time,
and when Terekhov rebuked him for it, he spat it out on the palm of his hand. "Pardon me." As we
have already reported, Abakumov roared with laugh- ter: "Hocus-pocus!" Terekhov showed him the
document author- izing him to inspect the Internal Prison of the Ministry of State Security.
Abakumov brushed it away: "You can forge five hun- dred of those!" As an organizational "patriot,"
he was principally offended not by being in prison but by this encroachment on the power of the
Organs, which could not be subordinate to anything in the world! In July, 1953, Ryumin was tried in
Moscow and shot. And Abakumov remained in prison! During one interroga- tion he said to
Terekhov: "Your eyes are too beautiful. / am going to be sorry to have to shoot you! Leave my case
alone. Leave it while you still have time."



[This is true. On the whole, D. Terekhov is a man of uncommon strength of will and courage (which
were what was required in bringing the big Stalinists to justice in an uneasy situation). And he
evidently has a lively mind as well. If Khrushchev's reforms had been more thoroughgoing and
consistent, Tere- khov might have excelled in carrying them out. That is how historic leaders fail to
materialize in our country.]

On another occasion Terekhov called him in and handed him the newspaper which carried the
announcement of Beria's exposure. At the time this was virtually a cosmic upheaval. Abakumov read
it and, with not so much as the twitch of an eyebrow, he turned the page and started to read the sports
news! On another occasion, during an interrogation in the presence of a high-ranking gaybist who
had, in the recent past, been his subordinate, Abakumov asked him: "How could you have permitted
the investigation of the Beria case to be con- ducted by the prosecutor's office instead of by the
MGB?" (Every- thing in his own domain kept nagging him.) He went on: "Do you really believe
they are going to put me, the Minister of State Security, on trial?" The answer was "Yes." And he
replied: "Then put on your top hat! The Organs are finished!" (He was, of course, too pessimistic,
uneducated courier that he was.) But when he was in the Lubyanka, Abakumov was not afraid of
being tried; he was afraid of being poisoned. (This, too, showed what a worthy son of the Organs he
was!) He started to reject the prison food altogether and would eat only eggs that he bought from the
prison store. (In this case, he simply lacked technical imagination. He thought one couldn't poison
eggs.) The only books he borrowed from the well-stocked Lubyanka library were the works of,
believe it or not, Stalin! (Who had imprisoned him.) But in all likelihood this was for show rather
than the result of any calculation that Stalin's adherents would gain power. He spent two years in
prison. Why didn't they release him? The question is not a na'ive one. In terms of his crimes against
humanity, he was over his head in blood. But he was not the only one! And all the others came out of
it safe and sound. There is some hidden secret here too: there is a vague rumor that in his time he had
personally beaten Khrushchev's daughter-in-law Lyuba Sedykh, the wife of Khru- shchev's older
son, who had been condemned to a punishment bat- taUon in Stalin's time and who died as a result.
And, so goes the rumor, this was why, having been imprisoned by Stalin, he was tried — in
Leningrad — under Khrushchev and shot on December 18, 1954.

[Here is one more of his eccentricities as a VIP: he used to change into civilian clothes and walk
around Moscow with Kuznetsov, the head of his bodyguard, and whenever he felt like it, he would
hand out money from the Cheka operations funds. Does not this smell of Old Russia — charity for the
sake of one's soul?]

But Abakumov had no real reason to be depressed: the Organs still didn't perish because of that. As
the folk saying goes: If you speak for the wolf speak against him as well. Where did this wolf-tribe
appear from among our people?

Does it really stem from our own roots? Our own blood?
It is our own.

And just so we don't go around flaunting too proudly the white mantle of the just, let everyone ask
himself: "If my life had turned out differently, might I myself not have become just such an ex-
ecutioner?"

It is a dreadful question if one really answers it honestly.

I remember my third year at the university, in the fall of 1938. We young men of the Komsomol
were summoned before the Dis- trict Komsomol Committee not once but twice. Scarcely bothering
to ask our consent, they shoved an application form at us: You've had enough physics, mathematics,
and chemistry; it's more im- portant to your country for you to enter the NKVD school. (That's the
way it always is. It isn't just some person who needs you; it is always your Motherland. And it is



always some official or other who speaks on behalf of your Motherland and who knows what she
needs.)

One year before, the District Committee had conducted a drive among us to recruit candidates for the
air force schools. We avoided getting involved that time too, because we didn't want to leave the
university — but we didn't sidestep recruitment then as stubbornly as we did this time.

Twenty-five years later we could think: Well, yes, we under- stood the sort of arrests that were being
made at the time, and the fact that they were torturing people in prisons, and the slime they were
trying to drag us into. But it isn't true! After all, the Black Marias were going through the streets at
night, and we were the same young people who were parading with banners during the day. How
could we know anything about those arrests and why should we think about them? All the provincial
leaders had been removed, but as far as we were concerned it didn't mat- ter. Two or three professors
had been arrested, but after all they hadn't been our dancing partners, and it might even be easier to
pass our exams as a result. Twenty-year-olds, we marched in the ranks of those born the year the
Revolution took place, and because we were the same age as the Revolution, the brightest of futures
lay ahead.

It would be hard to identify the exact source of that inner intuition, not founded on rational
argument, which prompted our refusal to enter the NKVD schools. It certainly didn't derive from the
lectures on historical materialism we listened to: it was clear from them that the struggle against the
internal enemy was a crucial battlefront, and to share in it was an honorable task. Our decision even
ran counter to our material interests: at that time the provincial university we attended could not
promise us any- thing more than the chance to teach in a rural school in a remote area for miserly
wages. The NKVD school dangled before us special rations and double or triple pay. Our feelings
could not be put into words — and even if we had found the words, fear would have prevented our
speaking them aloud to one another. It was not our minds that resisted but something inside our
breasts. Peo- pie can shout at you from all sides: "You must!" And your own head can be saying
also: "You must!" But inside your breast there is a sense of revulsion, repudiation. I don't want to. It
makes me feel sick. Do what you want without me; I want no part of it.

This came from very far back, quite likely as far back as Lermontov, from those decades of Russian
life when frankly and openly there was no worse and no more vile branch of the service for a decent
person than that of the gendarmerie. No, it went back even further. Without even knowing it
ourselves, we were ran- somed by the small change in copper that was left from the golden coins our
great-grandfathers had expended, at a time when moral- ity was not considered relative and when the
distinction between good and evil was very simply perceived by the heart.

Still, some of us were recruited at that time, and I think that if they had really put the pressure on,
they could have broken everybody's resistance. So I would like to imagine: if, by the time war broke
out, I had already been wearing an NKVD officer's insignia on my blue tabs, what would I have
become? Nowadays, of course, I can console myself by saying that my heart wouldn't have stood it,
that I would have objected and at some point slammed the door. But later, lying on a prison bunk, I
began to look back over my actual career as an officer and I was horrified.

I did not move in one stride from being a student worn out by mathematics to officer's rank. Before
becoming an officer I spent a half-year as a downtrodden soldier. And one might think I would have
gotten through my thick skull what it was like always to obey people who were perhaps not worthy
of your obedience and to do it on a hungry stomach to boot. Then for another half- year they tore me
to pieces in officer candidate school. So I ought to have grasped, once and for all, the bitterness of
service as a rank-and-file soldier and remembered how my hide froze and how it was flayed from my
body. But did I? Not at all. For consolation, they pinned two little stars on my shoulder boards, and
then a third, and then a fourth. And I forgot every bit of what it had been like!



Had I at least kept my student's love of freedom? But, you see, we had never had any such thing.
Instead, we loved forming up, we loved marches.

I remember very well that right after officer candidate school I experienced the happiness of
simplification, of being a military man and not having to think things through; the happiness of being
immersed in the life everyone else lived, that was accepted in our military milieu; the happiness of
forgetting some of the spiritual subtleties inculcated since childhood.

We were constantly hungry in that school and kept looking around to see where we could grab an
extra bite, and we watched one another enviously to see who was the cleverest. But most of all we
were afraid we wouldn't manage to stay in until the time came to graduate and receive our officer's
insignia. (They sent those who failed to the battle for Stalingrad.) And they trained us like young
beasts, so as to infuriate us to the point where we would later want to take it out on someone else.
We never got enough sleep because after taps, as punishment, we might be forced to go through the
drill alone under the eyes of a sergeant. Or the entire squad might be routed out at night and made to
form up because of one uncleaned boot: there he is, the bastard, and he'll keep on cleaning it, and
until he gets a shine on it you're all going to stay standing there.

In passionate anticipation of those insignia, we developed a tigerlike stride and a metallic voice of
command.

Then the officer's stars were fastened on our tabs. And only one month later, forming up my battery
in the rear, I ordered a careless soldier named Berbenyev to march up and down after taps under the
eyes of my insubordinate Sergeant Metlin. (And do you know, I had forgotten all about it until now.
I honestly forgot about it for years! Only now, seated in front of this sheet of paper, have I
remembered.) Some elderly colonel, who was an inspector, happened to be there, and he called me in
and put me to shame. And I (and this after I'd left the university!) tried to justify my action on the
grounds that it was what we had been taught in school. In other words, I meant: What humane views
can there be, given the fact that we are in the army?

(And the more so in the Organs.)

Pride grows in the human heart like lard on a pig.

I tossed out orders to my subordinates that I would not allow them to question, convinced that no
orders could be wiser. Even at the front, where, one might have thought, death made equals of us all,
my power soon convinced me that I was a superior human being. Seated there, I heard them out as
they stood at attention. I interrupted them. I issued commands. I addressed fathers and grandfathers
with the familiar, downgrading form of address — while they, of course, addressed me formally. I
sent them out to repair wires under shellfire so that my superiors should not re- proach me.
(Andreyashin died that way.) I ate my officer's ration of butter with rolls, without giving a thought as
to why I had a right to it, and why the rank-and-file soldiers did not. I, of course, had a personal
servant assigned to me — in polite terms, an "orderly" — whom I badgered one way or another and
ordered to look after my person and prepare my meals separately from the soldiers'. (After all, the
Lubyanka interrogators don't have order- lies — that's one thing you can't say about them.) I forced
my soldiers to put their backs into it and dig me a special dugout at every new bivouac and to haul
the heaviest beams to support it so that I should be as comfortable and safe as possible. And wait a
minute, yes, my battery always had a guardhouse too. What kind of guardhouse could there be in the
woods? It was a pit, of course, although a better one than those at the Gorokhovets division camps
which I have described, because it had a roof and the man confined got a soldier's ration. Vyushkov
was imprisoned there for losing his horse and Popkov for maltreating his carbine. Yes, just a
moment, I can remember more. They sewed me a map case out of German hide — not human, but
from a car seat. But I didn't have a strap for it, and I was unhappy about that. Then all of a sudden
they saw some partisan commissar, from the local District Party Committee, wearing just the right



kind of strap — and they took it away from him: we are the army; we have sen- iority! (Remember
Senchenko, the Security officer, who stole a map case and a dispatch case?) Finally, I coveted that
scarlet box, and I remember how they took it away and got it for me.

That's what shoulder boards do to a human being. And where have all the exhortations of
grandmother, standing before an ikon, gone! And where the young Pioneer's daydreams of future
sacred Equality!

And at the moment when my life was turned upside down and the SMERSH officers at the brigade
command point tore off those cursed shoulder boards, and took my belt away and shoved me along
to their automobile, I was pierced to the quick by worrying how, in my stripped and sorry state, I was
going to make my way through the telephone operator's room. The rank and file must not see me in
that condition!

The day after my arrest my march of penance began: the most recent "catch" was always sent from
the army counterintelligence center to the counterintelligence headquarters of the front. They herded
us on foot from Osterode to Brodnica.

When they led me out of the punishment cell, there were al- ready seven prisoners there in three and
a half pairs standing with their backs to me. Six of them had on well-worn Russian Army overcoats
which had been around for a long time, and on their backs had been painted, in indelible white paint,
"SU," meaning "Soviet Union." I already knew that mark, having seen it more than once on the
backs of our Russian POW's as they wandered sadly and guiltily toward the army that was approach-
ing to free them. They had been freed, but there was no shared happiness in that liberation. Their
compatriots glowered at them even more grimly than at the Germans. And as soon as they crossed
the front lines, they were arrested and imprisoned.

The seventh prisoner was a German civilian in a black three- piece suit, a black overcoat, and black
hat. He was over fifty, tall, well groomed, and his white face had been nurtured on gentleman's food.

I completed the fourth pair, and the Tatar sergeant, chief of the convoy, gestured to me to pick up my
sealed suitcase, which stood off to one side: It contained my officer's equipment as well as all the
papers which had been seized as evidence when I was arrested.

What did he mean, carry my suitcase? He, a sergeant, wanted me, an officer, to pick up my suitcase
and carry it? A large, heavy object? Despite the new regulations? While beside me six men from the
ranks would be marching empty-handed? And one representative of a conquered nation?

I did not express this whole complex set of ideas to the sergeant. I merely said: "I am an officer. Let
the German carry it."

None of the prisoners turned around at my words: turning around was forbidden. Only my mate in
the fourth pair, also an "SU," looked at me in astonishment. (When he had been cap- tured, our army
wasn't yet like that.)

But the sergeant from counterintelligence was not surprised. Even though I was not, of course, an
officer in his eyes, still his indoctrination and mine coincided. He summoned the innocent German
and ordered him to carry the suitcase. It was just as well the latter had not understood our
conversation.

The rest of us put our hands behind our backs. The former POW's did not have even one bag among
them. They had left the Motherland with empty hands and that is exactly how they re- turned to her.
So our column marched off, four pairs in file. We did not converse with our convoy. And it was
absolutely forbid- den to talk among ourselves whether on the march, during a halt, or at overnight



stops. As accused prisoners we were required to move as though separated by invisible partitions, as
though suf- focated, each in his own soUtary -confinement cell.

The early spring weather was changeable. At times a thin mist hung in the air, and even on the firm
highway the liquid mud squelched dismally beneath our boots. At times the heavens cleared and the
soft yellow sun, still uncertain of its talent, warmed the already thawing hillocks and showed us with
perfect clarity the world we were about to leave. At times a hostile squall flew to the attack and tore
from the black clouds a snow that was not really even white, which beat icily on faces and backs and
feet, soaking through our overcoats and our footcloths.

Six backs ahead of me, six constant backs. There was more than enough time to examine and re-
examine the crooked, hide- ous brands "SU" and the shiny black cloth on the German's back. There
was more than enough time to reconsider my former life and to comprehend my present one. But I
couldn't. I had been smashed on the head with an oak club — but I still didn't com- prebend.

Six backs! There was neither approval nor condemnation in their swing.

The German soon tired. He shifted the suitcase from hand to hand, grabbed at his heart, made signs
to the convoy that he couldn't carry it any further. At that point his neighbor in the pair, a POW who
only a little while before had experienced God knows what in German captivity (but, perhaps, mercy
too), took the suitcase of his own free will and carried it.

After that the other POW's carried it in turn, also without being ordered to; and then the German
again.

All but me.

And no one said a word to me.

At one point we met a long string of empty carts. The drivers studied us with interest, and some of
them jumped up to full height on top of the carts and stared. I understood very quickly that their
stares and their malice were directed toward me. I was very sharply set off from the others: my coat
was new, long, and cut to fit my figure snugly. My tabs had not yet been torn off, and in the filtered
sunlight my buttons, also not cut off, burned with the glitter of cheap gold. It was easy to see I was
an officer, with a look of newness, too, and newly taken into custody. Per- haps this very fall from
the heights stimulated them and gave them pleasure, suggesting some gleam of justice, but more
likely they could not get it into their heads, stuffed with political in- doctrination, that one of their
own company commanders could be arrested in this way, and they all decided unanimously I had
come from the other side.

"Aha, the Vlasov bastard got caught, did he! Shoot the rat!"

They were vehement in their rear-line wrath (the most intense patriotism always flourishes in the
rear), and they added a good deal more in mother oaths.

They regarded me as some kind of international operator who had, nonetheless, been caught — and as
a result the advance at the front would move along faster and the war would come to an end sooner.

How was I to answer them? I was forbidden to utter a single word, and I would have had to explain
my entire life to each and every one of them. What could I do to make them understand that I was
not a spy, a saboteur? That I was their friend? That it was because of them that I was here? I smiled.
Looking up at them, I smiled at them from a column of prisoners under escort! But my bared teeth
seemed to them the worst kind of mockery, and they shook their fists and bellowed insults at me
even more violently than before.



I smiled in pride that I had been arrested not for stealing, nor treason, nor desertion, but because I
had discovered through my power of reasoning the evil secrets of Stalin. I smiled at the thought that
I wanted, and might still be able, to effect some small remedies and changes in our Russian way of
Ufe.

But all that time my suitcase was being carried by others.

And I didn't even feel remorseful about it! And if my neighbor, whose sunken cheeks were already
covered with a soft two-week growth of beard and whose eyes were filled to overflowing with
suffering and knowledge, had then and there reproached me in the clearest of clear Russian words
for having disgraced the honor of a prisoner by appealing to the convoy for help and had accused me
of haughtiness, of setting myself above the rest of them, I would not have understood him! I simply
would not have under- stood what he was talking about. I was an officer!

And if seven of us had to die on the way, and the eighth could have been saved by the convoy, what
was to keep me from crying out: "Sergeant! Save me. I am an officer!"

And that's what an officer is even when his shoulder boards aren't blue!

And if they are blue? If he has been indoctrinated to believe that even among other officers he is the
salt of the earth? And that he knows more than others and is entrusted with more res- ponsibility than
others and that, consequently, it is his duty to force a prisoner's head between his legs, and then to
shove him like that into a pipe . . .

Why shouldn't he?

I credited myself with unselfish dedication. But meanwhile I had been thoroughly prepared to be an
executioner. And if I had gotten into an NKVD school under Yezhov, maybe I would have matured
just in time for Beria.

So let the reader who expects this book to be a political expose slam its covers shut right now.

If only it were all so simple! If only there were evil people somewhere insidiously committing evil

deeds, and it were neces- sary only to separate them from the rest of us and destroy them. But the
Une dividing good and evil cuts through the heart of every human being. And who is willing to
destroy a piece of his own heart?

During the life of any heart this line keeps changing place; sometimes it is squeezed one way by
exuberant evil and some- times it shifts to allow enough space for good to flourish. One and the
same human being is, at various ages, under various cir- cumstances, a totally different human being.
At times he is close to being a devil, at times to sainthood. But his name doesn't change, and to that
name we ascribe the whole lot, good and evil.

Socrates taught us: Know thyself!

Confronted by the pit into which we are about to toss those who have done us harm, we halt, stricken
dumb: it is after all only because of the way things worked out that they were the executioners and
we weren't.

If Malyuta Skuratov had summoned us, we, too, probably would have done our work well!
From good to evil is one quaver, says the proverb.



And correspondingly, from evil to good.



From the moment when our society was convulsed by the reminder of those illegalities and tortures,
they began on all sides to explain, to write, to protest: Good people were there too — meaning in the
NKVD-MGB!

We know which "good" people they are talking about: they were the ones who whispered to the old
Bolsheviks: "Don't weaken," or even sneaked a sandwich in to them, and who kicked all the rest
around wherever they found them. But weren't there also some who rose above the Party — who were
good in a general, human sense?

Broadly speaking, they should not have been there. The Organs avoided employing such people,
eliminating them at the recruit- ment stage. And such people played their hand shrewdly so as to get
out of it.

[ During the war, a certain Leningrad aviator, after being discharged from the hospital in Ryazan,
went to a TB clinic and begged: "Please find something wrong with me! I'm under orders to go into
the Organs!" The radiologists dreamed up a touch of TB for him — and the Organs dropped him
posthaste.]

Whoever got in by mistake either adjusted to the milieu or else was thrown out, or eased out, or even
fell across the rails himself. Still . . . were there no good people left there?

In Kishinev, a young lieutenant gaybist went to Father Viktor Shipovalnikov a full month before he
was arrested: "Get away from here, go away, they plan to arrest you!" (Did he do this on his own, or
did his mother send him to warn the priest?) After the arrest, this young man was assigned to Father
Viktor as an escort guard. And he grieved for him: "Why didn't you go away?"

Or here's another. I had a platoon commander named Lieuten- ant Ovsyannikov. At the front no one
was closer to me than he was. During half the war we ate from the same pot; even under enemy
shellfire we would gulp down our food between explosions, so the stew wouldn't get cold. He was a
peasant lad with a clean soul and a view of life so undistorted that neither officer candidate school
nor being an officer had spoiled him in any degree. He even did what he could to soften my hard
edges in many ways. Throughout his service as an officer he concentrated on one thing only:
preserving the lives and strength of his soldiers, many of whom were no longer young. He was the
first to tell me what the Russian villages were like then and what the collective farms were like. He
talked about all this without resentment, without protest, very simply and straightforwardly — just as
a forest pool reflects the image of a tree and all its branches, even the smallest. He was deeply
shocked by my arrest. He wrote me a combat reference containing the highest praise and got the
divisional commander to sign it. After he was demobilized he continued to try to help me, through
my relatives. And this, mind you, was in 1947, which was not very different from 1937. At my
interrogation I had many reasons to be afraid on his account, especially lest they read my "War
Diary," which contained the stories he'd told me. When I was rehabilitated in 1957, 1 very much
wanted to find him. I remembered his village address and wrote once, and then again, but there was
no reply. I discovered one thread I could follow — that he had graduated from the Yaroslavl
Pedagogical Institute. When I inquired there, they replied: "He was sent to work in the Organs of
State Security." Fine! All the more interesting! I wrote to him at his city address, but there was no
reply. Several years passed and Ivan Denisovich was published. Well, I thought, now he'll turn up.
No! Three years later I asked one of my Yaroslavl correspondents to go to him and personally hand
him a letter. My correspondent did as I asked and wrote me: "Evidently he has never read Ivan
Denisovich." And truly, why should they know how things go with prisoners after they've been
sentenced? This time Ovsyannikov couldn't keep silent any longer. He wrote: "After the Institute
they offered me work in the Organs, and it seemed to me I would be just as successful there." (What
did he mean, successful?) "I cannot say that I have prospered remark- ably in my new walk of life.
There are some things I did not like, but I work hard, and, if I am not mistaken, I shall not let my
comrades down." (And that's the justification — comradeship!) He ended: "I no longer think about the



future."



And that is all. Allegedly, he had not received my previous letters. Evidently, he doesn't want to see
me. (But if we had met, I think this would have been a better chapter.) In Stalin's last years he had
already become an interrogator — during those very years when they handed out a twenty-five -year
sentence to every- one who came along. How did everything in his consciousness recircuit itself?
How did everything black out? But remembering the once selfless, dedicated boy, as fresh as spring
water, can I possibly believe that everything in him changed beyond recall, that there are no living
tendrils left?

When the interrogator Goldman gave Vera Korneyeva the "206" form on nondisclosure to sign, she
began to catch on to her rights, and then she began to go into the case in detail, involy- ing as it did
all seventeen members of their "religious group." Goldman raged, but he had to let her study the file.
In order not to be bored waiting for her, he led her to a large office, where half a dozen employees
were sitting, and left her there. At first she read quietly, but then a conversation began — perhaps
because the others were bored — and Vera launched aloud into a real religious sermon. (One would
have had to know her to ap- predate this to the full. She was a luminous person, with a lively mind
and a gift of eloquence, even though in freedom she had been no more than a lathe operator, a stable
girl, and a housewife.) They listened to her impressively, now and then ask- ing questions in order to
clarify something or other. It was catch- ing them from an unexpected side of things. People came in
from other offices, and the room filled up. Even though they were only typists, stenographers, file
clerks, and not interrogators, in 1946 this was still their milieu, the Organs. It is impossible to recon-
struct her monologue. She managed to work in all sorts of things, including the question of "traitors
of the Motherland." Why were there no traitors in the 1812 War of the Fatherland, when there was
still serfdom? It would have been natural to have traitors then! But mostly she spoke about religious
faith and religious believers. Formerly, she declared, unbridled passions were the basis for
everything — "Steal the stolen goods" — and, in that state of affairs, religious believers were naturally
a hindrance to you. But now, when you want to build and prosper in this world, why do you
persecute your best citizens? They represent your most precious material: after all, believers don't
need to be watched, they do not steal, and they do not shirk. Do you think you can build a just
society on a foundation of self-serving and envious people? Everything in the country is falling
apart. Why do you spit in the hearts of your best people? Separate church and state properly and do
not touch the church; you will not lose a thing thereby. Are you materialists? In that case, put your
faith in education — in the possibility that it will, as they say, disperse religious faith. But why arrest
people? At this point Goldman came in and started to interrupt rudely. But everyone shouted at him:
"Oh, shut up! Keep quiet! Go ahead, woman, talk." (And how should they have addressed her?
Citizeness? Comrade? Those forms of address were forbidden, and these people were bound by the
conventions of Soviet life. But "woman" — that was how Christ had spoken, and you couldn't go
wrong there.) And Vera continued in the presence of her interrogator.

So there in the MGB office those people listened to Korneyeva — and why did the words of an
insignificant prisoner touch them so near the quick?

That same D. Terekhov I mentioned earlier remembers to this day the first prisoner he sentenced to
death. "I was sorry for him." His memory obviously clings to something that came from his heart.
(But after that first one, he forgot many and no longer kept count any more.)

[An episode with Terekhov: Attempting to prove to me the fairness of the judicial system under
Khrushchev, he energetically struck the plate-glass desk top with his hand and cut his wrist on the
edge. He rang for help. His subordi- nates were at the ready. The senior officer on duty brought him
iodine and hydrogen peroxide. Continuing the conversation, he helplessly held dampened cotton to
the wound: it appears that his blood coagulates poorly. And thus God showed him clearly the
limitations of the human being! And he had de- Uvered verdicts, imposed death sentences on others.]



No matter how icy the jailers in the Big House in Leningrad, the innermost nucleus of the nucleus of

the heart — for a nucleus has its own nucleus — had to continue to exist, did it not? N. P va recalls

the time when she was being taken to inter- rogation by an impassive, silent woman guard with
unseeing eyes — when suddenly the bombs began to explode right next to the Big House and it
sounded as if at the next moment they would fall directly on them. The terrified guard threw her
arms around her prisoner and embraced her, desperate for human companion- ship and sympathy.
Then the bombing stopped. And her eyes became unseeing again. "Hands behind your back! Move
along."

Well, of course, there was no great merit in that — to become a human being at the moment of death.
Similarly, loving one's own children is no proof of virtue. (People often try to excuse scoundrels by
saying: "He's a good family man!") The Chairman of the Supreme Court, I. T. Golyakov, is praised:
he enjoyed digging in his garden, he loved books, he used to browse around used- and rare-book
stores, he knew the work of Tolstoi, Koro- lenko, and Chekhov. Well, what did he learn from them?
How many thousands did he destroy? Or, for example, that colonel, Konkordiya losse's friend, who
had roared with laughter in the Vladimir Detention Prison at the memory of locking up a group of
old Jews in an ice-filled root cellar, had been afraid of one thing only during all his debaucheries:
that his wife might find out about them. She believed in him, regarded him as noble, and this faith of
hers was precious to him. But do we dare accept that feeling as a bridgehead to virtue in his heart?

And why is it that for nearly two hundred years the Security forces have hung onto the color of the
heavens? That was what they wore in Lermontov's lifetime — "and you, blue uniforms!" Then came
blue service caps, blue shoulder boards, blue tabs, and then they were ordered to make themselves
less conspicuous, and the blue brims were hidden from the gratitude of the people and everything
blue on heads and shoulders was made narrower — until what was left was piping, narrow rims . . .
but still blue.

Is this only a masquerade?

Or is it that even blackness must, every so often, however rarely, partake of the heavens?

It would be beautiful to think so. But when one learns, for example, the nature of Yagoda's striving
toward the sacred . . . An eyewitness from the group around Gorky, who was close to Yagoda at the
time, reports that in the vestibule of the bathhouse on Yagoda's estate near Moscow, ikons were
placed so that Yagoda and his comrades, after undressing, could use them as targets for revolver
practice before going in to take their baths.

Just how are we to understand that? As the act of an evildoer? What sort of behavior is it? Do such
people really exist?

We would prefer to say that such people cannot exist, that there aren't any. It is permissible to
portray evildoers in a story for children, so as to keep the picture simple. But when the great world
literature of the past — Shakespeare, Schiller, Dickens — in- flates and inflates images of evildoers of
the blackest shades, it seems somewhat farcical and clumsy to our contemporary per- ception. The
trouble lies in the way these classic evildoers are pictured. They recognize themselves as evildoers,
and they know their souls are black. And they reason: "I cannot live unless I do evil. So I'll set my
father against my brother! I'll drink the vie- tim's sufferings until I'm drunk with them!" lago very
precisely identifies his purposes and his motives as being black and bom of hate.

But no; that's not the way it is! To do evil a human being must first of all believe that what he's doing
is good, or else that it's a well-considered act in conformity with natural law. Fortunately, it is in the
nature of the human being to seek a justification for his actions.

Macbeth's self -justifications were feeble — and his conscience devoured him. Yes, even lago was a



little lamb too. The imagina- tion and the spiritual strength of Shakespeare's evildoers stopped short
at a dozen corpses. Because they had no ideology.

Ideology — that is what gives evildoing its long- sought justifica- tion and gives the evildoer the
necessary steadfastness and deter- mination. That is the social theory which helps to make his acts
seem good instead of bad in his own and others' eyes, so that he won't hear reproaches and curses but
will receive praise and honors. That was how the agents of the Inquisition fortified their wills: by
invoking Christianity; the conquerors of foreign lands, by extolling the grandeur of their Motherland;
the colonizers, by civilization; the Nazis, by race; and the Jacobins (early and late), by equality,
brotherhood, and the happiness of future generations.

Thanks to ideology, the twentieth century was fated to experi- ence evildoing on a scale calculated in
the millions. This cannot be denied, nor passed over, nor suppressed. How, then, do we dare insist
that evildoers do not exist? And who was it that de- stroyed these millions? Without evildoers there
would have been no Archipelago.

There was a rumor going the rounds between 1918 and 1920 that the Petrograd Cheka, headed by
Uritsky, and the Odessa Cheka, headed by Deich, did not shoot all those condemned to death but fed
some of them alive to the animals in the city zoos. I do not know whether this is truth or calumny, or,
if there were any such cases, how many there were. But I wouldn't set out to look for proof, either.
Following the practice of the bluecaps, I would propose that they prove to us that this was
impossible. How else could they get food for the zoos in those famine years? Take it away from the
working class? Those enemies were going to die anyway, so why couldn't their deaths support the
zoo economy of the Republic and thereby assist our march into the future? Wasn't it expedient?

That is the precise line the Shakespearean evildoer could not cross. But the evildoer with ideology
does cross it, and his eyes remain dry and clear.

Physics is aware of phenomena which occur only at threshold magnitudes, which do not exist at all
until a certain threshold encoded by and known to nature has been crossed. No matter how intense a
yellow light you shine on a lithium sample, it will not emit electrons. But as soon as a weak bluish
light begins to glow, it does emit them. (The threshold of the photoelectric effect has been crossed.)
You can cool oxygen to 100 degrees below zero Centigrade and exert as much pressure as you want;
it does not yield, but remains a gas. But as soon as minus 183 degrees is reached, it liquefies and
begins to flow.

Evidently evildoing also has a threshold magnitude. Yes, a human being hesitates and bobs back and
forth between good and evil all his life. He slips, falls back, clambers up, repents, things begin to
darken again. But just so long as the threshold of evildoing is not crossed, the possibility of returning
remains, and he himself is still within reach of our hope. But when, through the density of evil
actions, the result either of their own extreme degree or of the absoluteness of his power, he
suddenly crosses that threshold, he has left humanity behind, and without, perhaps, the possibility of
return.

From the most ancient times justice has been a two-part concept: virtue triumphs, and vice is
punished.

We have been fortunate enough to live to a time when virtue, though it does not triumph, is

nonetheless not always tormented by attack dogs. Beaten down, sickly, virtue has now been allowed
to enter in all its tatters and sit in the corner, as long as it doesn't raise its voice.

However, no one dares say a word about vice. Yes, they did mock virtue, but there was no vice in
that. Yes, so-and-so many millions did get mowed down — but no one was to blame for it. And if
someone pipes up: "What about those who ..." the answer comes from all sides, reproachfully and



amicably at first: "What are you talking about, comrade! Why open old wounds?"

[Even in connection with One Day in the Life of Ivan Denisovich, the retired bluecaps living on
pensions objected because the book might reopen the wounds of those who had been imprisoned in
camp. Allegedly, they were the ones to be protected.]

Then they go after you with an oaken club: "Shut up! Haven't you had enough yet? You think you've
been rehabilitated!"

In that same period, by 1966, eighty-six thousand Nazi crimi- nals had been convicted in West
Germany. 22

[Meanwhile, in East Germany, nothing of the sort is to be heard. Which means that there they have
been shod with new shoes; they are valued in the service of the state.]

And still we choke with anger here. We do not hesitate to devote to the subject page after newspaper
page and hour after hour of radio time. We even stay after work to attend protest meetings and vote:
"Too few! Eighty-six thousand are too few. And twenty years is too little! It must go on and on."

And during the same period, in our own country (according to the reports of the Military Collegium
of the Supreme Court) about ten men have been convicted.

What takes place beyond the Oder and the Rhine gets us all worked up. What goes on in the environs
of Moscow and behind the green fences near Sochi, or the fact that the murderers of our husbands
and fathers ride through our streets and we make way for them as they pass, doesn't get us worked up
at all, doesn't touch us. That would be "digging up the past."

Meanwhile, if we translate 86,000 West Germans into our own terms, on the basis of comparative
population figures, it would become one-quarter of a million.

But in a quarter-century we have not tracked down anyone. We have not brought anyone to trial. It is
their wounds we are afraid to reopen. And as a symbol of them all, the smug and stupid Molotov
lives on at Granovsky No. 3, a man who has learned nothing at all, even now, though he is saturated
with our blood and nobly crosses the sidewalk to seat himself in his long, wide automobile.

Here is a riddle not for us contemporaries to figure out: Why is Germany allowed to punish its
evildoers and Russia is not? What kind of disastrous path lies ahead of us if we do not have the
chance to purge ourselves of that putrefaction rotting inside our body? What, then, can Russia teach
the world?

In the German trials an astonishing phenomenon takes place from time to time. The defendant clasps

his head in his hands, refuses to make any defense, and from then on asks no conces- sions from the
court. He says that the presentation of his crimes, revived and once again confronting him, has filled
him with revulsion and he no longer wants to live.

That is the ultimate height a trial can attain: when evil is so utterly condemned that even the criminal
is revolted by it.

A country which has condemned evil 86,000 times from the rostrum of a court and irrevocably
condemned it in literature and among its young people, year by year, step by step, is purged of it.

What are we to do? Someday our descendants will describe our several generations as generations of
driveling do-nothings. First we submissively allowed them to massacre us by the mil- lions, and then
with devoted concern we tended the murderers in their prosperous old age.



What are we to do if the great Russian tradition of penitence is incomprehensible and absurd to
them? What are we to do if the animal terror of hearing even one-hundredth part of all they subjected
others to outweighs in their hearts any inclination to justice? If they cling greedily to the harvest of
benefits they have watered with the blood of those who perished?

It is clear enough that those men who turned the handle of the meat grinder even as late as 1937 are
no longer young. They are fifty to eighty years old. They have lived the best years of their lives
prosperously, well nourished and comfortable, so that it is too late for any kind of equal retribution
as far as they are con- cemed.

But let us be generous. We will not shoot them. We will not pour salt water into them, nor bury them
in bedbugs, nor bridle them into a "swan dive," nor keep them on sleepless "stand-up" for a week,
nor kick them with jackboots, nor beat them with rubber truncheons, nor squeeze their skulls in iron
rings, nor push them into a cell so that they lie atop one another like pieces of baggage — we will not
do any of the things they did! But for the sake of our country and our children we have the duty to
seek them all out and bring them all to trial! Not to put them on trial so much as their crimes. And to
compel each one of them to announce loudly:

"Yes, I was an executioner and a murderer."

And if these words were spoken in our country only one- quarter of a million times (a just
proportion, if we are not to fall behind West Germany), would it, perhaps, be enough?

It is unthinkable in the twentieth century to fail to distinguish between what constitutes an
abominable atrocity that must be prosecuted and what constitutes that "past" which "ought not to be
stirred up."

We have to condemn publicly the very idea that some people have the right to repress others. In
keeping silent about evil, in burying it so deep within us that no sign of it appears on the surface, we
are implanting it, and it will rise up a thousandfold in the future. When we neither punish nor
reproach evildoers, we are not simply protecting their trivial old age, we are thereby ripping the
foundations of justice from beneath new generations. It is for this reason, and not because of the
"weakness of indoc- trinational work," that they are growing up "indifferent." Young people are
acquiring the conviction that foul deeds are never punished on earth, that they always bring
prosperity.

It is going to be uncomfortable, horrible, to live in such a country!

Chapter 5

First Cell, First Love

How is one to take the title of this chapter? A cell and love in the same breath? Ah, well, probably it
has to do with Lenin- grad during the blockade — and you were imprisoned in the Big House. In that
case it would be very understandable. That's why you are still alive — because they shoved you in
there. It was the best place in Leningrad — not only for the interrogators, who even lived there and
had offices in the cellars in case of shelling. Joking aside, in Leningrad in those days no one washed
and everyone's face was covered with a black crust, but in the Big House prisoners were given a hot
shower every tenth day. Well, it's true that only the corridors were heated — for the jailers. The cells
were left unheated, but after all, there were water pipes in the cells that worked and a toilet, and
where else in Leningrad could you find that? And the bread ration was just like the ration outside —
barely four and a half ounces. In addition, there was broth made from slaughtered horses once a day!
And thin gruel once a day as well!



It was a case of the cat's being envious of the dog's Ufe! But what about punishment cells? And what
about the "supreme measure" — execution? No, that isn't what the chapter title is about.

Not at all.

You sit down and half-close your eyes and try to remember them all. How many different cells you
were imprisoned in during your term! It is difficult even to count them. And in each one there were
people, people. There might be two people in one, 150 in another. You were imprisoned for five
minutes in one and all summer long in another.

But in every case, out of all the cells you've been in, your first cell is a very special one, the place
where you first encountered others like yourself, doomed to the same fate. All your life you will
remember it with an emotion that you otherwise experience only in remembering your first love.
And those people, who shared with you the floor and air of that stone cubicle during those days
when you rethought your entire life, will from time to time be recollected by you as members of your
own family.

Yes, in those days they were your only family.

What you experience in your first interrogation cell parallels nothing in your entire previous life or
your whole subsequent life. No doubt prisons have stood for thousands of years before you came
along, and may continue to stand after you too — longer than one would like to think — but that first
interrogation cell is unique and inimitable.

Maybe it was a terrible place for a human being. A lice-laden, bedbug-infested lock-up, without
windows, without ventilation, without bunks, and with a dirty floor, a box called a KPZ in the village
soviet, at the police station, in the railroad station, or in some port. (The KPZ's and the DPZ's are
scattered across the face of our land in the greatest abundance. There are masses of prisoners in
them. )

[KPZ = Cell for Preliminary Detention. DPZ House of Preliminary Detention. In other words,
where interrogations are conducted, not where sentences are served.]

Or maybe it was "solitary" in the Archangel prison, where the glass had been smeared over with red
lead so that the only rays of God's maimed light which crept in to you were crimson, and where a 15-
watt bulb burned constantly in the ceiling, day and night. Or "solitary" in the city of Choibalsan,
where, for six months at a time, fourteen of you were crowded onto seven square yards of floor space
in such a way that you could only shift your bent legs in unison. Or it was one of the Lefortovo
"psychological" cells, like No. Ill, which was painted black and also had a day-and-night 25-watt
bulb, but was in all other respects like every other Lefortovo cell: asphalt floor; the heating valve out
in the corridor where only the guards had access to it; and, above all, that interminable irritating roar
from the wind tunnel of the neighboring Central Aero- and Hydrodynamics Institute — a roar one
could not believe was unintentional, a roar which would make a bowl or cup vibrate so violently that
it would slip off the edge of the table, a roar which made it useless to converse and during which one
could sing at the top of one's lungs and the jailer wouldn't even hear. And then when the roar
stopped, there would ensue a sense of reUef and felicity superior to freedom itself.

But it was not the dirty floor, nor the murky walls, nor the odor of the latrine bucket that you loved —

but those fellow prisoners with whom you about-faced at command, and that something which beat
between your heart and theirs, and their sometimes astonishing words, and then, too, the birth within
you, on that very spot, of free-floating thoughts you had so recently been unable to leap up or rise to.

And how much it had cost you to last out until that first cell! You had been kept in a pit, or in a box,
or in a cellar. No one had addressed a human word to you. No one had looked at you with a human



gaze. All they did was to peck at your brain and heart with iron beaks, and when you cried out or
groaned, they laughed.

For a week or a month you had been an abandoned waif, alone among enemies, and you had already
said good-bye to reason and to life; and you had already tried to kill yourself by "falling" from the
radiator in such a way as to smash your brains against the iron cone of the valve. Then all of a
sudden you were alive again, and were brought in to your friends. And reason returned to you.

That's what your first cell is!

You waited for that cell. You dreamed of it almost as eagerly as of freedom. Meanwhile, they kept
shoving you around between cracks in the wall and holes in the ground, from Lefortovo into some
legendary, diabolical Sukhanovka.

Sukhanovka was the most terrible prison the MGB had. Its very name was used to intimidate
prisoners; interrogators would hiss it threateningly. And you'd not be able to question those who had
been there: either they were insane and talking only discon- nected nonsense, or they were dead.

Sukhanovka was a former monastery, dating back to Catherine the Great. It consisted of two
buildings — one in which prisoners served out their terms, and the other a structure that contained
sixty -eight monks' cells and was used for interrogations. The journey there in a Black Maria took
two hours, and only a hand- ful of people knew that the prison was really just a few miles from
Lenin's Gorki estate and near the former estate of Zinaida Volkonskaya. The countryside
surrounding it was beautiful.

There they stunned the newly arrived prisoner with a stand-up punishment cell again so narrow that
when he was no longer able to stand he had to sag, supported by his bent knees propped against the
wall. There was no alternative. They kept prisoners thus for more than a day to break their resistance.
But they ate tender, tasty food at Sukhanovka, which was like nothing else in the MGB — because it
was brought in from the Architects' Rest Home. They didn't maintain a separate kitchen to prepare
hogwash. However, the amount one architect would eat — includ- ing fried potatoes and meatballs —
was divided among twelve prisoners. As a result the prisoners were not only always hungry but also
exceedingly irritable.

The cells were all built for two, but prisoners under interroga- tion were usually kept in them singly.
The dimensions were five by six and a half feet.

[To be absolutely precise, they were 156 centimeters by 209 centimeters. How do we know?
Through a triumph of engineering calculation and a strong heart that even Sukhanovka could not
break. The measurements were the work of Alexander D., who would not allow them to drive him to
madness or despair. He resisted by striving to use his mind to calculate distances. In Lefortovo he
counted steps, converted them into kilometers, remembered from a map how many kilometers it was
from Moscow to the border, and then how many across all Europe, and how many across the
Atlantic Ocean. He was sustained in this by the hope of returning to America. And in one year in
Lefortovo solitary he got, so to speak, halfway across the Atlantic. Thereupon they took him to Su-
khanovka. Here, realizing how few would survive to tell of it — and all our in- formation about it
comes from him — he invented a method of measuring the cell. The numbers 10/22 were stamped on
the bottom of his prison bowl, and he guessed that "10" was the diameter of the bottom and "22" the
diameter of the outside edge. Then he pulled a thread from a towel, made himself a tape measure,
and measured everything with it. Then he began to invent a way of sleeping standing up, propping
his knees against the small chair, and of deceiv- ing the guard into thinking his eyes were open. He
succeeded in this deception, and that was how he managed not to go insane when Ryumin kept him
sleepless for a month.]



Two little round stools were welded to the stone floor, like stumps, and at night, if the guard
unlocked a cylinder lock, a shelf dropped from the wall onto each stump and remained there for
seven hours (in other words, during the hours of interrogation, since there was no daytime
interrogation at Sukhanovka at all), and a little straw mattress large enough for a child also dropped
down. During the day, the stool was exposed and free, but one was forbidden to sit on it. In addition,
a table lay, like an ironing board, on four upright pipes. The "fortochka" in the window — the small
hinged pane for ventilation — was always closed except for ten minutes in the morning when the
guard cranked it open. The glass in the little window was reinforced. There were never any exercise
periods out of doors. Prisoners were taken to the toilet at 6 A.M. only — i.e., when no one's stomach
needed it. There was no toilet period in the eve- ning. There were two guards for each block of seven
cells, so that was why the prisoners could be under almost constant in- spection through the
peephole, the only interruption being the time it took the guard to step past two doors to a third. And
that was the purpose of silent Sukhanovka: to leave the prisoner not a single moment for sleep, not a
single stolen moment for privacy. You were always being watched and always in their power.

But if you endured the whole duel with insanity and all the trials of loneliness, and had stood firm,
you deserved your first cell! And now when you got into it, your soul would heal.

If you had surrendered, if you had given in and betrayed every- one, you were also ready for your
first cell. But it would have been better for you not to have lived until that happy moment and to
have died a victor in the cellar, without having signed a single sheet of paper.

Now for the first time you were about to see people who were not your enemies. Now for the first
time you were about to see others who were alive, who were traveling your road, and whom you
could join to yourself with the joyous word "we."

[And if this was in the Big House in Leningrad during the siege, you may also have seen cannibals.
Those who had eaten human flesh, those who had traded in human livers from dissecting rooms,
were for some reason kept by the MGB with the political prisoners.]

Yes, that word which you may have despised out in freedom, when they used it as a substitute for
your own individuality ("All of us, like one man!" Or: "We are deeply angered!" Or: "We demand!"
Or: "We swear!"), is now revealed to you as something sweet: you are not alone in the world! Wise,
spiritual beings — human beings — still exist.

I had been dueling for four days with the interrogator, when the jailer, having waited until I lay down
to sleep in my blindingly lit box, began to unlock my door. I heard him all right, but before he could
say: "Get up! Interrogation!" I wanted to lie for another three-hundredths of a second with my head
on the pillow and pretend I was sleeping. But, instead of the familiar command, the guard ordered:
"Get up! Pick up your bedding!"

Uncomprehending, and unhappy because this was my most precious time, I wound on my footcloths,
put on my boots, my overcoat, my winter cap, and clasped the government-issue mat- tress in my
arms. The guard was walking on tiptoe and kept signaling me not to make any noise as he led me
down a corridor silent as the grave, through the fourth floor of the Lubyanka, past the desk of the
section supervisor, past the shiny numbers on the cells and the olive-colored covers of the peepholes,
and unlocked Cell 67. 1 entered and he locked it behind me immediately.

Even though only a quarter of an hour or so had passed since the signal to go to sleep had been
given, the period allotted the prisoners for sleeping was so fragile, and undependable, and brief that,
by the time I arrived, the inhabitants of Cell 67 were already asleep on their metal cots with their
hands on top of the blankets.

[New measures of oppression, additions to the traditional prison regula- tions, were invented only



gradually in the internal prisons of the GPU-NKVD- MGB. At the beginning of the twenties,
prisoners were not subjected to this particular measure, and lights were turned off at night as in the
ordinary world. But they began to keep the lights on, on the logical grounds that they needed to keep
the prisoners in view at all times. (When they used to turn the lights on for inspection, it had been
even worse.) Arms had to be kept outside the blanket, allegedly to prevent the prisoner from
strangling himself beneath the blanket and thus escaping his just interrogation. It was demonstrated
experi- mentally that in the winter a human being always wants to keep his arms under the
bedclothes for warmth; consequently the measure was made permanent.]

At the sound of the door opening, all three started and raised their heads for an instant. They, too,
were waiting to learn which of them might be taken to interrogation.

And those three lifted heads, those three unshaven, crumpled pale faces, seemed to me so human, so
dear, that I stood there, hugging my mattress, and smiled with happiness. And they smiled. And what
a forgotten look that was — after only one week!

"Are you from freedom?" they asked me. (That was the question customarily put to a newcomer.)
"Nooo," I replied. And that was a newcomer's usual first reply.

They had in mind that I had probably been arrested recently, which meant that I came from freedom.
And I, after ninety-six hours of interrogation, hardly considered that I was from "free- dom." Was I
not already a veteran prisoner? Nonetheless I was from freedom. The beardless old man with the
black and very lively eyebrows was already asking me for military and political news. Astonishing!
Even though it was late February, they knew nothing about the Yalta Conference, nor the
encirclement of East Prussia, nor anything at all about our own attack below Warsaw in mid-
January, nor even about the woeful December retreat of the Allies. According to regulations, those
under inter- rogation were not supposed to know anything about the outside world. And here indeed
they didn't!

I was prepared to spend half the night telling them all about it — with pride, as though all the victories
and advances were the work of my own hands. But at this point the duty jailer brought in my cot, and
I had to set it up without making any noise. I was helped by a young fellow my own age, also a
military man. His tunic and aviator's cap hung on his cot. He had asked me, even before the old man
spoke, not for news of the war but for tobacco. But although I felt openhearted toward my new
friends, and although not many words had been exchanged in the few minutes since I joined them, I
sensed something alien in this front-line soldier who was my contemporary, and, as far as he was
concerned, I clammed up immediately and forever.

(I had not yet even heard the word "nasedka" — "stool pigeon" — nor learned that there had to be one

such "stool pigeon" in each cell. And I had not yet had time to think things over and conclude that I
did not like this fellow, Georgi Kramarenko. But a spiritual relay, a sensor relay, had clicked inside
me, and it had closed him off from me for good and all. I would not bother to recall this event if it
had been the only one of its kind. But soon, with astonishment, and alarm, I became aware of the
work of this internal sensor relay as a constant, inborn trait. The years passed and I lay on the same
bunks, marched in the same forma- tions, and worked in the same work brigades with hundreds of
others. And always that secret sensor relay, for whose creation I deserved not the least bit of credit,
worked even before I remem- bered it was there, worked at the first sight of a human face and eyes,
at the first sound of a voice — so that I opened my heart to that person either fully or just the width of
a crack, or else shut myself off from him completely. This was so consistently un- failing that all the
efforts of the State Security officers to employ stool pigeons began to seem to me as insignificant as
being pestered by gnats: after all, a person who has undertaken to be a traitor always betrays the fact
in his face and in his voice, and even though some were more skilled in pretense, there was always
something fishy about them. On the other hand, the sensor relay helped me distinguish those to



whom I could from the very begin- ning of our acquaintance completely disclose my most precious
depths and secrets — secrets for which heads roll. Thus' it was that I got through eight years of
imprisonment, three years of exile, and another six years of underground authorship, which were in
no wise less dangerous. During all those seventeen years I recklessly revealed myself to dozens of
people — and didn't make a misstep even once. (I have never read about this trait anywhere, and I
mention it here for those interested in psy- chology. It seems to me that such spiritual sensors exist in
many of us, but because we live in too technological and rational an age, we neglect this miracle and
don't allow it to develop.)

We set up the cot, and I was then ready to talk — in a whisper, of course, and lying down, so as not to
be sent from this cozy nest into a punishment cell. But our third cellmate, a middle- aged man whose
cropped head already showed the white bristles of imminent grayness, peered at me discontentedly
and said with characteristic northern severity: "Tomorrow! Night is for sleep- ing."

That was the most intelligent thing to do. At any minute, one of us could have been pulled out for
interrogation and held until 6 A.M., when the interrogator would go home to sleep but we were
forbidden to.

One night of undisturbed sleep was more important than all the fates on earth!

One more thing held me back, which I didn't quite catch right away but had felt nonetheless from the
first words of my story, although I could not at this early date find a name for it: As each of us had
been arrested, everything in our world had switched places, a 180-degree shift in all our concepts had
oc- curred, and the good news I had begun to recount with such enthusiasm might not be good news
for us at all.

My cellmates turned on their sides, covered their eyes with their handkerchiefs to keep out the light
from the 200-watt bulb, wound towels around their upper arms, which were chilled from lying on top
of the blankets, hid their lower arms furtively beneath them, and went to sleep.

And I lay there, filled to the brim with the joy of being among them. One hour ago I could not have
counted on being with anyone. I could have come to my end with a bullet in the back of my head —
which was what the interrogator kept promising me — without having seen anyone at all.
Interrogation still hung over me, but how far it had retreated! Tomorrow I would be telling them my
story (though not talking about my case, of course) and they would be telling me their stories too.
How interesting tomorrow would be, one of the best days of my life! (Thus, very early and very
clearly, I had this consciousness that prison was not an abyss for me, but the most important turning
point in my life.)

Every detail of the cell interested me. Sleep fled, and when the peephole was not in use I studied it
all furtively. Up there at the top of one wall was a small indentation the length of three bricks,
covered by a dark-blue paper blind. They had al- ready told me it was a window. Yes, there was a
window in the cell. And the blind served as an air-raid blackout. Tomorrow there would be weak
daylight, and in the middle of the day they would turn off the glaring light bulb. How much that
meant — to have daylight in daytime!

There was also a table in the cell. On it, in the most con- spicuous spot, were a teapot, a chess set,
and a small pile of books. (I was not yet aware why they were so conspicuously positioned. It turned
out to be another example of the Lubyanka system at work. During his once-a-minute peephole
inspection, the jailer was supposed to make sure that the gifts of the prison administration were not
being misused: that the teapot was not being used to break down the wall; that no one was
swallowing the chessmen and thereby possibly cashing in his chips and ceasing to be a citizen of the
U.S.S.R.; and that no one was starting a fire with the books in the hope of burning down the whole
prison. And a prisoner's eyeglasses were considered so potentially dangerous that they were not



allowed to remain on the table during the night; the prison administration took them away until
morning.)

What a cozy life! Chess, books, cots with springs, decent mattresses, clean linen. I could not
remember having slept like this during the whole war. There was a worn parquet floor. One could
take nearly four strides from window to door in the aisle between the cots. No, indeed! This central
political prison was a real resort.

And no shells were falling. I remembered their sounds: the high-pitched sobbing way up overhead,
then the rising whistle, and the crash as they burst. And how tenderly the mortar shells whistled. And
how everything trembled from the four blasts of what we called "Dr. Goebbels' mortar-rockets." And
I remem- bered the wet snow and mud near Wormditt, where I had been arrested, which our men
were still wading through to keep the Germans from breaking out of our encirclement.

All right then, the hell with you; if you don't want me to fight, I won't.

Among our many lost values there is one more: the high worth of those people who spoke and wrote
Russian before us. It is odd that they are almost undescribed in our prerevolutionary litera- ture. Only
very rarely do we feel their breath — from Marina Tsvetayeva, or from "Mother Mariya" (in her
Recollections ofBlok). They saw too much to settle on any one thing. They reached toward the
sublime too fervently to stand firmly on the earth. Before societies fall, just such a stratum of wise,
thinking people emerges, people who are that and nothing more. And how they were laughed at!
How they were mocked! As though they stuck in the craw of people whose deeds and actions were
single- minded and narrow-minded. And the only nickname they were christened with was "rot."
Because these people were a flower that bloomed too soon and breathed too delicate a fragrance.
And so they were mowed down.

These people were particularly helpless in their personal lives: they could neither bend with the
wind, nor pretend, nor get by; every word declared an opinion, a passion, a protest. And it was just
such people the mowing machine cut down, just such people the chaff-cutter shredded.

[I am almost fearful of saying it, but it seems as though on the eve of the 1970's these people are
emerging once again. That is surprising. It was almost too much to hope for.]

They had passed through these very same cells. But the cell walls — for the wallpaper had long since
been stripped off, and they had been plastered, whitewashed, and painted more than once — gave off
nothing of the past. (On the contrary, the walls now tried to listen to us with hidden microphones.)
Nowhere is anything written down or reported of the former inhabitants of these cells, of the
conversations held in them, of the thoughts with which earlier inmates went forth to be shot or to
imprison- ment on the Solovetsky Islands. And now such a volume, which would be worth forty
freight car loads of our literature, will in all probability never be written.

Those still alive recount to us all sorts of trivial details: that there used to be wooden trestle beds here
and that the mattresses were stuffed with straw. That, way back in 1920, before they put muzzles
over the windows, the panes were whitewashed up to the top. By 1923 "muzzles" had been installed
(although we unanimously ascribed them to Beria). They said that back in the twenties, prison
authorities had been very lenient toward pris- oners communicating with each other by "knocking"
on the walls: this was a carry-over from the stupid tradition in the Tsarist prisons that if the prisoners
were deprived of knocking, they would have no way to occupy their time. And another thing: back in
the twenties all the jailers were Latvians, from the Latvian Red Army units and others, and the food
was all handed out by strapping Latvian women.

All this was trivial detail, but it was certainly food for thought. I myself had needed very badly to get
into this main Soviet political prison, and I was grateful that I had been sent here: I thought about



Bukharin a great deal and I wanted to picture the whole thing as it had actually been. However, I had
the impres- sion that we were by now merely the remnants, and that in this respect we might just as
well have been in any provincial "internal" prison.

[One attached to a State Security headquarters.]

Still, there was a good deal of status in being here.

And there was no reason to be bored with my companions in my new cell. They were people to listen
to and people with whom to compare notes.

The old fellow with the lively eyebrows — and at sixty-three he in no way bore himself like an old

man — was Anatoly Ilyich Fastenko. He was a big asset to our Lubyanka cell — both as a keeper of
the old Russian prison traditions and as a living history of Russian revolutions. Thanks to all that he
remembered, he somehow managed to put in perspective everything that had taken place in the past
and everything that was taking place in the present. Such people are valuable not only in a cell. We
badly need them in our society as a whole.

Right there in our cell we read Fastenko's name in a book about the 1905 Revolution. He had been a
Social Democrat for such a long, long time that in the end, it seemed, he had ceased to be one.

He had been sentenced to his first prison term in 1904 while still a young man, but he had been freed
outright under the "manifesto" proclaimed on October 17, 1905.

[Who among us has not learned by heart from our school history courses, as well as from the Short
Course in the history of the Soviet Communist Party, that this "provocative and foul manifesto" was
a mockery of freedom, that the Tsar had proclaimed: "Freedom for the dead, and prison for the
living"? But the epigram was bogus. The manifesto declared that all political parties were to be
tolerated and that a State Duma was to be convened, and it provided for an amnesty which was
honest and extremely extensive. (The fact that it had been issued under duress was something else
again.) Indeed, under its terms none other than all political prisoners without exception were to be
released without reference to the term and type of punishment they had been sentenced to. Only
criminals remained imprisoned. The Stalin amnesty of July 7, 1945 — true, it was not issued under
duress — was exactly the opposite. All the political prisoners remained imprisoned.]

His story about that amnesty was interesting. In those years, of course, there were no muzzles on the
prison windows, and from the cells of the Belaya Tserkov Prison in which Fastenko was being held
the prisoners could easily observe the prison courtyard and the street, and all arrivals and departures,
and they could shout back and forth as they pleased to ordinary citizens outside. During the day of
October 17, these outsiders, having learned of the amnesty by telegraph, announced the news to the
prisoners. In their happiness the political prisoners went wild with joy. They smashed windowpanes,
broke down doors, and demanded that the prison warden release them immediately. And were any of
them kicked right in the snout with jackboots? Or put in punishment cells? Or was anyone deprived
of library and commissary privileges? Of course not! In his distress, the warden ran from cell to cell
and implored them: "Gentlemen! I beg of you, please be reasonable! I don't have the authority to
release you on the basis of a telegraphed report. I must have direct orders from my superiors in Kiev.
Please, I beg of you. You will have to spend the night here." And in actual fact they were most
barbarously kept there for one more day.

[After Stalin's amnesty, as I will recount later, those amnestied were held in prison for another two or
three months and were forced to slog away just as before. And no one considered this illegal.]

On getting back their freedom, Fastenko and his comrades immediately rushed to join the revolution.
In 1906 he was sentenced to eight years at hard labor, which meant four years in irons and four in



exile. He served the first four years in the Sevastopol Central Prison, where, incidentally, during his
stay, a mass escape was organized from outside by a coalition of revolutionary parties: the SR's, the
Anarchists, and the Social Democrats. A bomb blew a hole in the prison wall big enough for a horse
and rider to go through, and two dozen prisoners — not everyone who wanted to escape, but those
who had been chosen ahead of time by their parties and, right inside the prison, had been equipped
with pistols by the jailers — fled through the hole and escaped. All but one: Anatoly Fastenko was
selected by the Russian Social Democratic Party not to escape but to cause a disturbance in order to
distract the attention of the guards.

On the other hand, when he reached exile in the Yenisei area, he did not stay there long. Comparing
his stories (and later those of others who had survived) with the well-known fact that under the Tsar
our revolutionaries escaped from exile by the hundreds and hundreds, and more and more of them
went abroad, one comes to the conclusion that the only prisoners who did not escape from Tsarist
exile were the lazy ones — because it was so easy. Fastenko "escaped," which is to say, he simply
left his place of exile without a passport. He went to Vladivostok, ex- pecting to get aboard a steamer
through an acquaintance there. Somehow it did not work out. So then, still without a passport, he
calmly crossed the whole of Mother Russia on a train and went to the Ukraine, where he had been a
member of the Bolshevik underground and where he had first been arrested. There he was given a
false passport, and he left to cross the Austrian border. That particular step was so routine, and
Fastenko felt himself so safe from pursuit, that he was guilty of an astonishing piece of carelessness.
Having arrived at the border, and having turned in his passport to the official there, he suddenly
discovered he could not remember his new name. What was he to do? There were forty passengers
altogether and the official had already begun to call off their names. Fastenko thought up a solution.
He pretended to be asleep. He listened as the passports were handed back to their owners, and he
noted that the name Makarov was called several times without anyone responding. But even at this
point he was not absolutely certain it was his name. Finally, the dragon of the imperial regime bent
down to the underground revolutionary and politely tapped him on the shoulder: "Mr. Makarov! Mr.
Makarov! Please, here is your passport!"

Fastenko headed for Paris. There he got to know Lenin and Lunacharsky and carried out some
administrative duties at the Party school at Longjumeau. At the same time he studied French, looked
around him, and decided that he wanted to travel farther and see the world. Before the war he went
to Canada, where he worked for a while, and he spent some time in the United States as well. He was
astonished by the free and easy, yet solidly established life in these countries, and he concluded that
they would never have a proletarian revolution and even that they hardly needed one.

Then, in Russia, the long-awaited revolution came, sooner than expected, and everyone went back to
Russia, and then there was one more Revolution. Fastenko no longer felt his former passion for these
revolutions. But he returned, compelled by the same need that urges birds to their annual migrations.

[Soon after Fastenko returned to the Motherland, he was followed by a Canadian acquaintance, a
former sailor on the battleship Potemkin, one of the mutineers, in fact, who had escaped to Canada
and become a well-to-do farmer there. This former Potemkin sailor sold everything he owned, his
farm and cattle, and returned to his native region with his money and his new tractor to help build
sacred socialism. He enlisted in one of the first agricultural communes and donated his tractor to it.
The tractor was driven any which way by whoever happened along and was quickly ruined. And the
former Potemkin sailor saw things turning out very differently from the way he had pictured them for
twenty years. Those in charge were incompetents, issuing orders that any sensible farmer could see
were wild nonsense. In addition, he became skinnier and skinnier, and his clothes wore out, and
nothing was left of the Canadian dollars he had exchanged for paper rubles. He begged to be allowed
to leave with his family, and he crossed the border as poor as when he fled from the Potemkin. He
crossed the ocean, just as he had done then, working his way as a sailor, because he had no money
for passages, and back in Canada he began life all over again as a hired hand on a farm.]



There was much about Fastenko I could not yet understand. In my eyes, perhaps the main thing
about him, and the most surprising, was that he had known Lenin personally. Yet he was quite cool
in recalling this. (Such was my attitude at the time that when someone in the cell called Fastenko by
his patronymic alone, without using his given name — in other words simply "Ilyich," asking: "Ilyich,
is it your turn to take out the latrine bucket?" — I was utterly outraged and offended because it
seemed sacrilege to me not only to use Lenin's patronymic in the same sentence as "latrine bucket,"
but even to call anyone on earth "Ilyich" except that one man, Lenin. ) For this reason, no doubt,
there was much that Fastenko would have liked to explain to me that he still could not bring himself
to.

Nonetheless, he did say to me, in the clearest Russian: "Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven
image!" But I failed to understand him!

Observing my enthusiasm, he more than once said to me insistently: "You're a mathematician; it's a
mistake for you to forget that maxim of Descartes: 'Question everything!' Ques- tion everything!"
What did this mean — "everything"? Certainly not everything! It seemed to me that I had questioned
enough things as it was, and that was enough of that!

Or he said: "Hardly any of the old hard-labor political pris- oners of Tsarist times are left. I am one
of the last. All the hard- labor politicals have been destroyed, and they even dissolved our society in
the thirties." "Why?" I asked. "So we would not get together and discuss things." And although these
simple words, spoken in a calm tone, should have been shouted to the heavens, should have shattered
windowpanes, I understood them only as indicating one more of Stalin's evil deeds. It was a trouble-
some fact, but without roots.

One thing is absolutely definite: not everything that enters our ears penetrates our consciousness.
Anything too far out of tune with our attitude is lost, either in the ears themselves or somewhere
beyond, but it is lost. And even though I clearly re- member Fastenko's many stories, I recall his
opinions but vaguely. He gave me the names of various books which he strongly advised me to read
whenever I got back to freedom. In view of his age and his health, he evidently did not count on
getting out of prison alive, and he got some satisfaction from hoping that I would someday
understand his ideas. I couldn't write down the list of books he suggested, and even as it was there
was a great deal of prison life for me to remember, but I at least remembered those titles which were
closest to my taste then: Untimely Thoughts by Gorky (whom I regarded very highly at that time,
since he had, after all, outdone all the other classical Russian writers in being proletarian) and
Plekhanov's A Year in the Motherland.

Today, when I read what Plekhanov wrote on October 28, 1917, 1 can clearly reconstruct what
Fastenko himself thought:

... I am disappointed by the events of the last days not because I do not desire the triumph of
the working class in Russia but precisely because I pray for it with all the strength of my soul. .
. . [We must] remember Engels' remark that there could be no greater historical tragedy for
the working class than to seize political power when it is not ready for it. [Such a seizure of
power] would compel it to retreat far back from the positions which were won in February and
March of the present year.

[G. V. Plekhanov, "An Open Letter to the Workers of Petrograd," in the newspaper Yedinstvo,
October 28, 1917.]

When Fastenko returned to Russia, pressure was put on him, out of respect for his old underground
exploits, to accept an important position. But he did not want to; instead, he accepted a modest post

on the newspaper Pravda and then a still more modest one, and eventually he moved over to the
Moscow City Planning office, where he worked in an inconspicuous job.



I was surprised. Why had he chosen such a cul-de-sac? He ex- plained in terms I found
incomprehensible. "You can't teach an old dog to live on a chain."

Realizing that there was nothing he could accomplish, Fastenko quite simply wanted, in a very
human way, to stay alive. He had already gotten used to living on a very small pension — not one of
the "personal" pensions especially assigned by the government, because to have accepted that sort of
thing would have called attention to his close ties to many who had been shot. And he might have
managed to survive in this way until 1953. But, to his misfortune, they arrested another tenant in his

apartment, a debauched, perpetually drunken writer, L. S v, who had bragged somewhere while

he was drunk about owning a pistol. Owning a pistol meant an obligatory conviction for terrorism,
and Fastenko, with his ancient Social Democratic past, was naturally the very picture of a terrorist.
Therefore, the interroga- tor immediately proceeded to nail him for terrorism and, simul- taneously,
of course, for service in the French and Canadian intelligence services and thus for service in the
Tsarist Okhrana as well.

[This was one of Stalin's pet themes — to ascribe to every arrested Bol- shevik, and in general to

every arrested revolutionary, service in the Tsarist Okhrana. Was this merely his intolerant
suspiciousness? Or was it intuition? Or, perhaps, analogy? . . .]

And in 1945, to earn his fat pay, the fat interrogator was quite seriously leafing through the archives

of the Tsarist provincial gendarmerie administrations, and composing entirely serious interrogation
depositions about conspiratorial nicknames, passwords, and secret rendezvous and meetings in 1903.

On the tenth day, which was as soon as was permitted, his old wife (they had no children) delivered
to Anatoly Ilyich such parcels as she could manage to put together: a piece of black bread weighing
about ten and a half ounces (after all, it had been bought in the open market, where bread cost 50
rubles a pound), and a dozen peeled boiled potatoes which had been pierced by an awl when the
parcel was being inspected. And the sight of those wretched — and truly sacred — parcels tore at one's
heartstrings.

That was what this human being had earned for sixty-three years of honesty and doubts.

The four cots in our cell left an aisle in the middle, where the table stood. But several days after my
arrival, they put a fifth per- son in with us and inserted a cot crosswise.

They brought in the newcomer an hour before rising time — that brief, sweetly cerebral last hour, and
three of us did not lift our heads. Only Kramarenko jumped up, to sponge some to- bacco, and
maybe, with it, some material for the interrogator. They began to converse in a whisper, and we tried
not to listen. But it was quite impossible not to overhear the newcomer's whisper. It was so loud, so
disquieting, so tense, and so close to a sob, that we realized it was no ordinary grief that had entered
our cell. The newcomer was asking whether many were shot. Nonetheless, without turning my head,
I called them down, asking them to talk more quietly.

When, on the signal to rise, we all instantly jumped up (lying abed earned you the punishment cell),

we saw a general, no less! True, he wasn't wearing any insignia of rank, not even tabs — nor could
one see where his insignia had been torn off or unscrewed, but his expensive tunic, his soft overcoat,
indeed his entire figure and face, told us that he was unquestionably a general, in fact a typical
general, and most certainly a full general, and not one of your run-of-the-mill major generals. He
was short, stocky, very broad of shoulder and body, and notably fat in the face, but this fat, which
had been acquired by eating well, endowed him, not with an appearance of good-natured
accessibility, but with an air of weighty importance, of affiliation with the highest ranks. The
crowning part of his face was, to be sure, not the upper portion, but the lower, which resembled a
bulldog's jaw. It was there that his energy was concentrated, along with his will and
authoritativeness, which were what had enabled him to attain such rank by early middle age.



We introduced ourselves, and it turned out that L. V. Z v was even younger than he appeared.

He would be thirty-six that year — "If they don't shoot me." Even more surprisingly, it de- veloped
that he was not a general at all, not even a colonel, and not even a military man — but an engineer!

An engineer? I had grown up among engineers, and I could remember the engineers of the twenties
very well indeed: their open, shining intellects, their free and gentle humor, their agility and breadth
of thought, the ease with which they shifted from one engineering field to another, and, for that
matter, from technology to social concerns and art. Then, too, they personified good manners and
delicacy of taste; well-bred speech that flowed evenly and was free of uncultured words; one of them
might play a musical instrument, another dabble in painting; and their faces always bore a spiritual
imprint.

From the beginning of the thirties I had lost contact with that milieu. Then came the war. And here
before me stood — an engineer, one of those who had replaced those destroyed.

No one could deny him one point of superiority. He was much stronger, more visceral, than those
others had been. His shoulders and hands retained their strength even though they had not needed it
for a long time. Freed from the restraints of courtesy, he stared sternly and spoke impersonally, as if
he didn't even consider the possibility of a dissenting view. He had grown up differently from those
others too, and he worked differently.

His father had plowed the earth in the most literal sense. Lenya Z v had been one of those

disheveled, unenlightened peasant boys whose wasted talents so distressed Belinsky and Tolstoi. He
was certainly no Lomonosov, and he could never have gotten to the Academy on his own, but he was
talented. If there had been no revolution, he would have plowed the land, and he would have become
well-to-do because he was energetic and active, and he might have raised himself into the merchant
class.

It being the Soviet period, however, he entered the Komsomol, and his work in the Komsomol,
overshadowing his other talents, lifted him out of anonymity, out of his lowly state, out of the
countryside, and shot him like a rocket through the Workers' School right into the Industrial
Academy. He arrived there in 1929 — at the very moment when those other engineers were being
driven in whole herds into Gulag. It was urgently necessary for those in power to produce their own
engineers — poUtically- conscious, loyal, one-hundred percenters, who were to become bigwigs of
production, Soviet businessmen, in fact, rather than people who did things themselves. That was the
moment when the famous commanding heights overlooking the as-yet-uncreated industries were
empty. And it was the fate of Z v's class in the Industrial Academy to occupy them.

Z v's life became a chain of triumphs, a garland wind- ing right up to the peak. Those were the

exhausting years, from 1929 to 1933, when the civil war was being waged, not as in 1918 to 1920
with tachankas — machine guns mounted on horse- drawn carts — but with police dogs, when the long
lines of those dying of famine trudged toward the railroad stations in the hope of getting to the cities,
which was where the breadgrains were evidently ripening, but were refused tickets and were unable
to leave — and lay dying beneath the station fences in a submissive human heap of homespun coats

and bark shoes. In those same years Z v not only did not know that bread was rationed to city

dwellers but, at a time when a manual laborer was receiving 60 rubles a month in wages, he enjoyed

a student's scholarship of 900 rubles a month. Z v's heart did not ache for the countryside whose

dust he had shaken from his feet. His new life was already soaring elsewhere among the victors and
the leaders.

He never had time to be an ordinary, run-of-the-mill foreman. He was immediately assigned to a
position in which he had dozens of engineers and thousands of workers under him. He was the chief
engineer of the big construction projects outside Mos- cow. From the very beginning of the war he,
of course, had an exemption from military service. He was evacuated to Alma-Ata, together with the



department he worked for, and in this area he bossed even bigger construction projects on the Hi
River. But in this case his workers were prisoners. The sight of those little gray people bothered him
very little at the time, nor did it in- spire him to any reappraisals nor compel him to take a closer
look. In that gleaming orbit in which he circled, the only im- portant thing was to achieve the

projected totals, fulfillment of the plan. And it was quite enough for Z v merely to punish a

particular construction unit, a particular camp, and a par- ticular work superintendent — after that, it
was up to them to manage to fulfill their norm with their own resources. How many hours they had
to work to do it or what ration they had to get along on were details that didn't concern him.

The war years deep in the rear were the best years in Z v's life. Such is the eternal and universal

aspect of war: the more grief it accumulates at one of its poles, the more joy it generates at the other.

Z V had not only a bulldog's jaw but also a swift, enterprising, businesslike grasp. With the

greatest skill he immediately switched to the economy's new wartime rhythm. Everything for
victory. Give and take, and the war will write it all off. He made just one small concession to the
war. He got along without suits and neckties, and, camouflaging himself in khaki color, had chrome-
leather boots made to order and donned a general's tunic — the very one in which he appeared before
us. That was fashionable and not uncommon at the time. It provoked neither anger in the war-
wounded nor reproachful glances from women.

Women usually looked at him with another sort of glance. They came to him to get well fed, to get

warmed up, to have some fun. He had wild money passing through his hands. His billfold bulged
like a little barrel with expense money, and to him ten-ruble notes were like kopecks, and thousands

like single rubles. Z v didn't hoard them, regret spending them, or keep count of them. He

counted only the women who passed through his hands, and particularly those he had "uncorked."
This count was his sport. In the cell he assured us that his arrest had broken off the count at 290 plus,
and he regretted that he had not reached 300. Since it was wartime and the women were alone and
lonely. And since, in addition to his power and money, he had the virility of a Rasputin, one can
probably believe him. And he was quite prepared to describe one episode after another. It was just
that our ears were not prepared to listen to him. Even though no danger threatened him during those
last years, he had frantically grabbed these women, messed them up, and then thrown them away,
like a greedy diner eating boiled crayfish — grabbing one, devouring it, sucking it, then grabbing the
next.

He was so accustomed to the malleability of material, to his own vigorous boarlike drive across the
land! (Whenever he was especially agitated, he would dash about the cell like a powerful boar who
might just knock down an oak tree in his path.) He was so accustomed to an environment in which
all the leaders were his own kind of people, in which one could always make a deal, work things out,
cover them up! He forgot that the more success one gains, the more envy one arouses. As he found
out during his interrogation, a dossier had been accumulating against him since way back in 1936, on
the basis of an anecdote he had carelessly told at a drunken party. More denunciations had fol-
lowed, and more testimony from agents (after all, one has to take women to restaurants, where all
types of people see you!). Another report pointed out that he had been in no hurry to leave Moscow
in 1941, that he had been waiting for the Germans. He had in actual fact stayed on longer than he

should have, ap- parently because of some woman. Z v took great care to keep his business deals

clean. But he quite forgot the existence of Article 58. Nonetheless, the avalanche might not have
over- whelmed him had he not grown overconfident and refused to supply building materials for a
certain prosecutor's dacha. That was what caused his dormant case to awaken and tremble and start
roUing. (And this was one more instance of the fact that cases begin with the material self-interest of
the blueboys.)

The scope of Z v's concepts of the world can be judged by the fact that he believed there was a

Canadian language. During the course of two months in the cell, he did not read a single book, not
even a whole page, and if he did read a para- graph, it was only to be distracted from his gloomy
thoughts about his interrogation. It was clear from his conversation that he had read even less in



freedom. He knew of Pushkin — as the hero of bawdy stories. And of Tolstoi he knew only, in all
probability, that he was — a Deputy of the Supreme Soviet!

On the other hand, was he a one hundred percent loyal Com- munist? Was he that same socially-
conscious proletarian who had been brought up to replace Palchinsky and von Meek and their ilk?
This was what was really surprising — he was most cer- tainly not! We once discussed the whole
course of the war with him, and I said that from the very first moment I had never had any doubts
about our victory over the Germans. He looked at me sharply; he did not believe me. "Come on,
what are you saying?" And then he took his head in his hands. "Oh, Sasha, Sasha, and I was
convinced the Germans would win! That's what did me in!" There you are! He was one of the
"organizers of victory," but each day he believed in the Germans' success and awaited their
inevitable arrival. Not because he loved them, but simply because he had so sober an insight into our
economy (which I, of course, knew nothing about and therefore believed in).

All of us in the cell were deeply depressed, but none of us was so crushed as Z v, none took his

arrest as so profound a tragedy. He learned from us that he would get no more than a tenner, that
during his years in camp he would, of course, be a work superintendent, and that he would not have
to experience real suffering, as indeed he never did. But this did not comfort him in the least. He was
too stricken by the collapse of such a glorious life. After all, it was his one and only life on earth, and
no one else's, which had interested him all his thirty-six years. And more than once, sitting on his cot
in front of the table, propping his pudgy head on his short, pudgy arm, he would start to sing quietly,
in a singsong voice and with lost, befogged eyes:

Forgotten and abandoned
Since my young, early years,
I was left a tiny orphan. . . .

He could never get any further than that. At that point, he would break into explosive sobs. All that
bursting strength which could not break through the walls that enclosed him he turned inward,
toward self-pity.

And toward pity for his wife. Every tenth day (since oftener was not allowed) his wife, long since
unloved, brought him rich and bountiful food parcels — the whitest of white bread, butter, red caviar,
veal, sturgeon. He would give each of us a sandwich and a twist of tobacco and then bend down to
the provisions he had set before himself, delighting in odors and colors that con- trasted vividly with
the bluish potatoes of the old underground revolutionary Fastenko. Then his tears would start to pour
again, redoubled. He recalled out loud his wife's tears, whole years of tears: some due to love notes
she had found in his trousers, some to some woman's underpants in his overcoat pocket, stuffed there
hurriedly in his automobile and forgotten. And when he was thus torn by burning self-pity, his armor
of evil energy fell away, and before us was a ruined and clearly a good person. I was astonished that
he could sob so. The Estonian Arnold Susi, our cellmate with the gray bristles in his hair, explained
it to me: "Cruelty is invariably accompanied by sentimentality. It is the law of complementaries. For
example, in the case of the Germans, the combination is a national trait."

Fastenko, on the other hand, was the most cheerful person in the cell, even though, in view of his
age, he was the only one who could not count on surviving and returning to freedom. Flinging an
arm around my shoulders, he would say:

To stand up for the truth is nothing!
For truth you have to sit in jail!

Or else he taught me to sing this song from Tsarist hard-labor days:



And if we have to perish



In mines and prisons wet,

Our cause will ever find renown

In future generations yet.

And I believe this! May these pages help his faith come true!

The sixteen-hour days in our cell were short on outward events, but they were so interesting that I,
for example, now find a mere sixteen minutes' wait for a trolley bus much more boring. There were
no events worthy of attention, and yet by evening I would sigh because once more there had not been
enough time, once more the day had flown. The events were trivial, but for the first time in my life I
learned to look at them through a magnifying glass.

The most difficult hours in the day were the first two. At the rattle of the key in the lock (for at the
Lubyanka there were no "swill troughs," [Special large openings in the cell doors of many Russian
prisons [known to the prisoners as "kormushki," meaning "swill troughs" or "fodder bins"]. Their
Uds dropped down to make tiny tables. Conversations with the jailers were carried on through these
openings, food was handed through, and prison papers were shoved through for the prisoners to
sign.] and it was necessary to unlock the door even to shout: "Time to get up!"), we jumped up
without lingering, made our beds, and sat down on them feeling empty and helpless, with the electric
light still burning. This enforced wakefulness from 6 A.M. on — at a time when the brain was still
lazy from sleep, the whole world seemed repulsive and all of life wrecked, and there was not a gulp
of air in the cell — was particularly ludicrous for those who had been under interrogation all night and
had only just been able to get to sleep. But don't try to steal extra sleep! If you should try to doze off,
leaning slightly against the wall, or propped over the table as if studying the chessboard, or relaxing
over a book lying conspicuously open on your knees, the key would sound a warning knock on the
door, or, worse yet, the door with that rattling lock would suddenly open silently, since the Lubyanka
jailers were specially trained to do just that, and like a spirit passing through a wall, the swift and
silent shadow of the junior sergeant would take three steps into the cell, hook onto you as you slept,
and maybe take you off to the punishment cell; or maybe they would take book privileges away from
the whole cell or deprive everyone of their daily walk — a cruel, unjust punishment for all, and there
were other punish- ments, too, in the black lines of the prison regulations. Read them! They hang in
every cell. If, incidentally, you needed glasses to read, then you wouldn't be reading books or the
sacred regulations either during those two starving hours. Eye- glasses were taken away every night,
and it was evidently still "dangerous" for you to have them during those two hours when no one
brought anything to the cell, and no one came to it. No one asked about anything, and no one was
summoned — the inter- rogators were still sleeping sweetly. And the prison administra- tion was just
opening its eyes, coming to. Only the vertukhai, the turnkeys, were active and energetic, opening the
peephole cover once a minute for inspection.

[During my time this word "vertukhai" had already come into wide currency for the jailers. It was
said to have originated with Ukrainian guards who were always ordering: "Stoi, ta ne vertukhais!"
And yet it is also worth recalling the English word for jailer, "turnkey," is "verti klyuch" in Russian.
Perhaps a "vertukhai" here in Russia is also "one who turns the key."]

But one procedure was carried out during those two hours: the morning trip to the toilet. When the
guard roused us, he made an important announcement. He designated the person from our cell who
was to be entrusted with the responsibility of carrying out the latrine bucket. (In more isolated,
ordinary prisons the prisoners had enough freedom of speech and self-government to decide this
question themselves. But in the Chief Political Prison such an important event could not be left to
chance.) So then you formed up in single file, hands behind your backs, and, at the head of the line,
the responsible latrine-bucket-bearer carried chest high the two-gallon tin pail with a lid on it. When
you reached your goal, you were locked in again, each having first been handed a small piece of
paper, the size of two railway tickets. (At the Lubyanka this was not particularly interesting. The
paper was blank and white. But there were enticing prisons where they gave you pages of books —



and what reading that was! You could try to guess whence it came, read it over on both sides, digest
the contents, evaluate the style — and when words had been cut in half that was particularly essential!
You could trade with your comrades. In some places they handed out pages from the once
progressive Granat Encyclopedia, and sometimes, it's awful to say it, from the classics, and I don't
mean belles-lettres either. Visits to the toilet thus became a means of acquiring knowledge. )

But there's not that much to laugh at. We are dealing with that crude necessity which it is considered
unsuitable to refer to in literature (although there, too, it has been said, with immortal adroitness:
"Blessed is he who early in the morning . . ."). This allegedly natural start of the prison day set a trap
for the prisoner that would grip him all day, a trap for his spirit — which was what hurt. Given the
lack of physical activity in prison, and the meager food, and the muscular relaxation of sleep, a
person was just not able to square accounts with nature immediately after rising. Then they quickly
returned you to the cell and locked you up — until 6 P.M., or, in some prisons, until morning. At that
point, you would start to get worried and worked up by the ap- proach of the daytime interrogation
period and the events of the day itself, and you would be loading yourself up with your bread ration
and water and gruel, but no one was going to let you visit that glorious accommodation again, easy
access to which /ree people are incapable of appreciating. This debilitating, banal need could make
itself felt day after day shortly after the morning toilet trip and would then torment you the whole
day long, op- press you, rob you of the inclination to talk, read, think, and even of any desire to eat
the meager food.

People in the cells sometimes discussed how the Lubyanka system and schedule, and those in other
prisons as well, had come into being, whether through calculated brutality or as a matter of chance.
My opinion is that both factors are involved. The rising time is, obviously, a matter of malicious
intent, but much of the rest evolved automatically at first (which is true of many of the brutalities of
life generally) and was then discovered by the powers that be to be useful and was therefore made
permanent. The shifts change at 8 A.M. and 8 P.M., and it was more con- venient for everyone to
take the prisoners to the toilet at the end of a shift. (Letting them out singly in the middle of the day
was extra trouble and meant extra precautions, and no one got paid for that.) The same was true of
the business with eyeglasses: Why should one worry about that at 6 A.M.? They could be returned to
the owners just before the end of the shift instead.

So now we heard them being brought around — doors were being opened. We could guess whether
someone wore them in the cell next door. (And didn't your codefendant wear spectacles? But we
didn't feel up to knocking out a message on the wall. This was punished very severely.) A moment
later they would bring the eyeglasses to our cell. Fastenko used them only for reading. But Susi
needed them all the time. He could stop squint- ing once he'd put them on. Thanks to his horn-
rimmed glasses and straight lines above the eyes, his face became severe, per- spicacious, exactly the
face of an educated man of our century as we might picture it to ourselves. Back before the
Revolution he had studied at the Faculty of History and Philology of the Uni- versity of Petrograd,
and throughout his twenty years in inde- pendent Estonia he had preserved intact the purest Russian
speech, which he spoke like a native. Later, in Tartu, he had studied law. In addition to Estonian, he
spoke English and Ger- man, and through all these years he continued to read the London Economist
and the German scientific "Berichte" summaries. He had studied the constitutions and the codes of
law of various countries — and in our cell he represented Europe worthily and with restraint. He had
been a leading lawyer in Estonia and been known as "kuldsuu" — meaning "golden-tongued."

There was new activity in the corridor. A free-loader in a gray smock — a husky young fellow who
had certainly not been at the front — brought a tray with our five bread rations and ten lumps of
sugar. Our cell stoolie hovered over them, even though we would inevitably cast lots for them —
which we did because every least detail of this was important: the heel of the loaf, for instance, and
the number of smaller pieces needed to make the total weight come out right, and how the crust
adheres, or doesn't, to the inside of the bread — and it was better that fate should decide.



[Where indeed in our country did this casting of lots not happen? It was the result of our universal
and endless hunger. In the army, all rations were divided up the same way. And the Germans, who
could hear what was going on from their trenches, teased us about it: "Who gets it? The political
com- missar!"]

But the stoolie felt he just had to hold everything in his hands for at least a second so that some bread
and sugar molecules would cling to his palms.

That pound of unrisen wet bread, with its swamplike sogginess of texture, made half with potato
flour, was our crutch and the main event of the day. Life had begun! The day had begun — this was
when it began! And everyone had countless problems. Had he allocated his bread ration wisely the
day before? Should he cut it with a thread? Or break it up greedily? Or slowly, quietly nip off pieces
one by one? Should he wait for tea or pile into it right now? Should he leave some for dinner or
finish it off at lunch? And how much?

In addition to these wretched dilemmas, what wide-ranging discussions and arguments went on (for
our tongues had been liberated and with bread we were once more men) provoked by this one-pound
chunk in our hand, consisting more of water than of grain. (Incidentally, Fastenko explained that the
workers of Moscow were eating the very same bread at that time.) And, gen- erally speaking, was
there any real breadgrain in this bread at all? And what additives were in it? (There was at least one
person in every cell who knew all about additives, for, after all, who hadn't eaten them during these
past decades?) Discussions and remi- niscences began. About the white bread they had baked back in
the twenties — springy round loaves, like sponge cake inside, with a buttery reddish-brown top crust
and a bottom crust that still had a trace of ash from the coals of the hearth — that bread had vanished
for good! Those bom in 1930 would never know what bread is. Friends, this is a forbidden subject!
We agreed not to say one word about food.

Once again there was movement in the corridor — tea was being brought around. A new young tough
in a gray smock carrying pails. We put our teapot out in the corridor and he poured straight into it
from a pail without a spout — into the teapot and onto the runner and the floor beneath it. And the
whole corridor was polished like that of a first-class hotel.

[Soon the biologist Timofeyev-Ressovsky, whom I have already men- tioned, would be brought here
from Berlin. There was nothing at the Lubyanka, it appeared, which so offended him as this spilling
on the floor. He considered it striking evidence of the lack of professional pride on the part of the
jailers, and of all of us in our chosen work. He multiplied the 27 years of Lubyanka's existence as a
prison by 730 times (twice for each day of the year), and then by 1 1 1 cells — and he would seethe for
a long time because it was easier to spill boiling water on the floor 2,188,000 times and then come
and wipe it up with a rag the same number of times than to make pails with spouts.]

And that was all they gave us. Whatever cooked food we got would be served at 1 P.M. and at 4
P.M., one meal almost on the heels of the other. You could then spend the next twenty -one hours
remembering it. (And that wasn't prison brutality either: it was simply a matter of the kitchen staff
having to do its work as quickly as possible and leave.)

At nine o'clock the morning check-up took place. For a long while beforehand, we could hear
especially loud turns of the key and particularly sharp knocks on the doors. Then one of the duty
lieutenants for the whole floor would march forward and enter, almost as erect as if he were standing
at attention. He would take two steps forward and look sternly at us. We would be on our feet. (We
didn't even dare remember that political prisoners were once not required to rise.) It was no work at
all to count us — he could do it in a glance — but this was a moment for testing our rights. For we did
have some rights, after all, although we did not really know them, and it was his job to hide them
from us. The whole strength of the Lubyanka training showed itself in a totally machinelike manner:
no expression on the face, no inflection, not a superfluous word.



And which of our rights did we know about? A request to have our shoes repaired. An appointment
with the doctor. Although if they actually took you to the doctor, you would not be happy about the
consequences. There the machinelike Lubyanka manner would be particularly striking. He didn't ask:
"What's your trouble?" That would take too many words, and one couldn't pronounce the phrase
without any inflection. He would ask curtly: "Troubles?" And if you began to talk at too great length
about your ailment, he would cut you off. It was clear anyway. A tooth- ache? Extract it. You could
have arsenic. A filling? We don't fill teeth here. (That would have required additional appoint- ments
and created a somewhat humane atmosphere. )

The prison doctor was the interrogator's and executioner's right-hand man. The beaten prisoner
would come to on the floor only to hear the doctor's voice: "You can continue, the pulse is normal."
After a prisoner's five days and nights in a punishment cell the doctor inspects the frozen, naked
body and says: "You can continue." If a prisoner is beaten to death, he signs the death certificate:
"Cirrhosis of the liver" or "Coronary occlusion." He gets an urgent call to a dying prisoner in a cell
and he takes his time. And whoever behaves differently is not kept on in the prison.

[Dr. F. P. Gaaz would have earned nothing extra in our country.]

But our stoolie was better informed about his rights. (Accord- ing to him he had already been under
interrogation eleven months. And he was taken to interrogation only during the day. ) He spoke up
and asked for an appointment with the prison chief. What, the chief of the whole Lubyanka? Yes.
His name was taken down. (And in the evening, after taps, when the interrogators were al- ready in
their offices, he was summoned. And he returned with some makhorka. ) This was very crude, of
course, but so far they had not been able to think up anything better. It would have been a big
expense to convert entirely to microphones in the walls and impossible to listen in on all 111 cells
for whole days at a time. Who would do it? Stool pigeons were cheaper and would continue to be
used for a long time to come. But Kramarenko had a hard time with us. Sometimes he eavesdropped
so hard that the sweat poured from him, and we could see from his face that he didn't understand
what we were saying.

There was one additional right — the privilege of writing appli- cations and petitions (which replaced
freedom of the press, of assembly, and of the ballot, all of which we had lost when we left freedom).
Twice a month the morning duty officer asked: "Who wants to write a petition?" And they listed
everyone who wanted to. In the middle of the day they would lead you to an individual box and lock
you up in it. In there, you could write whomever you pleased: the Father of the Peoples, the Central
Committee of the Party, the Supreme Soviet, Minister Beria, Minister Abakumov, the General
Prosecutor, the Chief Military Prosecutor, the Prison Administration, the Investigation Depart- ment.
You could complain about your arrest, your interrogator, even the chief of the prison! In each and
every case your petition would have no effect whatever. It would not be stapled into any file, and the
most senior official to read it would be your own interrogator. However, you were in no position to
prove this. In fact, it was rather more likely that he would not read it, because no one would be able
to read it. On a piece of paper measuring seven by ten centimeters — in other words, three by four
inches — a little larger than the paper given you each morning at the toilet, with a pen broken in the
middle or bent into a hook, and an inkwell with pieces of rag in it and ink diluted with water, you
would just be able to scratch out "Petit ..." Then the letters would all run together on the cheap
paper, "ion" couldn't be worked into the line, and everything would come through on the other side
of the sheet.

You might have still other rights, but the duty officer would keep quiet about them. And you
wouldn't be losing much, truth to tell, even if you didn't find out about them.

The check-up came and went. And the day began. The inter- rogators were already arriving there
somewhere. The turnkey would summon one of us with a great air of secrecy; he called out the first
letter of the name only. Like this: "Whose name begins with 'S'?" and: "Whose name begins with



'F?" Or perhaps: "Whose begins with 'M'? — with 'Am'?" And you yourself had to be quick-witted
enough to recognize that it was you he wanted and offer yourself as a victim. This system was
introduced to prevent mistakes on the jailer's part. He might have called out a name in the wrong
cell, and that way we might have found out who else was in prison. And yet, though cut off from the
entire prison, we were not deprived of news from other cells. Because they tried to crowd in as many
prisoners as possible, they shuffled them about from cell to cell, and every newcomer brought all his
accumulated experience to his new cell. Thus it was that we, imprisoned on the fourth floor, knew all
about the cellar cells, about the boxes on the first floor, about the darkness on the second floor,
where the women were all kept, about the split-level arrange- ment of the fifth, and about the biggest
cell of all on the fifth floor — No. 111. Before my time, the children's writer Bondarin had been a
prisoner in our cell, and before that he had been on the women's floor with some Polish
correspondent or other, who had previously been a cellmate of Field Marshal von Paulus — and that
was how we learned all the details about von Paulus.

The period for being summoned to interrogation passed. And for those left in the cell a long, pleasant
day stretched ahead, lightened by opportunities and not overly darkened by duties. Duties could

include sterilizing the cots with a blow torch twice a month. (At the Lubyanka, matches were
categorically for- bidden to prisoners; to get a light for a cigarette we had to signal patiently with a
finger when the peephole was opened, thus asking the jailer for a light. But blow torches were
entrusted to us with- out hesitation.) And once a week we might be called into the corridor to have
our faces clipped with a dull clipper — allegedly a right but strongly resembling a duty. And one

might be as- signed the duty of cleaning the parquet floor in the cell. (Z v always avoided this

work because it was beneath his dignity, like any other work, in fact.) We got out of breath quickly
because we were underfed; otherwise we would have considered this duty a privilege. It was such
gay, lively work — pushing the brush forward with one's bare foot, torso pulled back, and then turn
about; forward-back, forward-back, and forget all your grief! Shiny as a mirror! A Potemkin prison!

Besides, we didn't have to go on being overcrowded in our old Cell 67 any longer. In the middle of
March they added a sixth prisoner to our number, and since here in the Lubyanka they did not fill all
the cells with board bunks, nor make you sleep on the floor, they transferred all of us into a beauty of
a cell — No. 53. (I would advise anyone who has not yet been in it to pay it a visit.) This was not a
cell. It was a palace chamber set aside as a sleeping apartment for distinguished travelers! The
Rossiya In- surance Company, without a thought for economy, had raised the height of the ceiUng in
this wing to sixteen and a half feet.

[This company acquired a piece of Moscow earth that was well ac- quainted with blood. The
innocent Vereshchagin was torn to pieces in 1812 on Furkasovsky, near the Rostopchin house. And
the murderess and serf-owner Saltychikha lived — and killed serfs — on the other side of the Bolshaya
Lub- yanka. (Po Moskve [In Moscow], edited by N. A. Geinike and others, Moscow, Sabashnikov
Publishers, 1917, p. 231.)]

(Oh, what four-story bunks the chief of counterintelligence at the front would have slapped in here.
And he could have gotten one hundred people in, results guaranteed.) And the window! It was such
an enormous window that standing on its sill the jailer could hardly reach the "fortochka," that
hinged ventilation pane. One section of this window alone would have made a fine whole window in
an ordinary house. Only the riveted steel sheets of the muzzle closing off four-fifths of it reminded us
that we were not in a palace after all.

Nonetheless, on clear days, above this muzzle, from the wall of the Lubyanka courtyard, from some
windowpane or other on the sixth or seventh floor, we now and then got a pale reflection of a ray of
sunlight. To us it was a real ray of sunlight — a living, dear being! We followed with affection its
climb up the wall. And every step it made was filled with meaning, presaging the time of our daily
outing in the fresh air, counting off several half- hours before lunch. Then, just before lunch, it
disappeared.



And our rights included being let out for a walk, reading books, telling one another about the past,
hstening and learning, arguing and being educated! And we would be rewarded by a lunch that
included two courses! Too good to be true!

The walk was bad on the first three floors of the Lubyanka. The prisoners were let out into a damp,
low-lying little courtyard — the bottom of a narrow well between the prison buildings. But the
prisoners on the fourth and fifth floors, on the other hand, were taken to an eagle's perch — on the
roof of the fifth floor. It had a concrete floor; there were concrete walls three times the height of a
man; we were accompanied by an unarmed jailer; on the watch tower was a sentinel with an
automatic weapon. But the air was real and the sky was real! "Hands behind your back! Line up in
pairs! No talking! No stopping!" Such were the com- mands, but they forgot to forbid us to throw
back our heads. And, of course, we did just that. Here one could see not a re- fleeted, not a
secondhand Sun, but the real one! The real, eternally living Sun itself! Or its golden diffusion
through the spring clouds.

Spring promises everyone happiness — and tenfold to the pris- oner. Oh, April sky! It didn't matter

that I was in prison. Evi- dently, they were not going to shoot me. And in the end I would become
wiser here. I would come to understand many things here. Heaven! I would correct my mistakes yet,
O Heaven, not for them but for you. Heaven! I had come to understand those mistakes here, and I
would correct them!

As if from a pit, from the far-off lower reaches, from Dzer- zhinsky Square, the hoarse earthly
singing of the automobile horns rose to us in a constant refrain. To those who were dashing along to
the tune of those honkings, they seemed the trumpets of creation, but from here their insignificance
was very clear.

The walk in the fresh air lasted only twenty minutes, but how much there was about it to concern
oneself with; how much one had to accomplish while it lasted.

In the first place, it was very interesting to try to figure out the layout of the entire prison while they
were taking you there and back, and to calculate where those tiny hanging courtyards were, so that at
some later date, out in freedom, one could walk along the square and spot their location. We made
many turns on the way there, and I invented the following system: Starting from the cell itself, I
would count every turn to the right as plus one, and every turn to the left as minus one. And, no
matter how quickly they made us turn, the idea was not to try to picture it hastily to oneself, but to
count up the total. If, in addition, through some staircase window, you could catch a glimpse of the
backs of the Lubyanka water nymphs, half-rec lining against the pillared turret which hovered over
the square itself, and you could remember the exact point in your count when this happened, then
back in the cell you could orient yourself and figure out what your own window looked out on.

And during that outdoor walk you concentrated on breathing as much fresh air as possible.

There, too, alone beneath that bright heaven, you had to im- agine your bright future life, sinless and
without error.

There, too, was the best place of ail to talk about the most dangerous subjects. It didn't matter that
conversation during the walk was forbidden. One simply had to know how to manage it. The
compensation was that in all likelihood you could not be over- heard either by a stoolie or by a
microphone.

During these walks I tried to get into a pair with Susi. We talked together in the cell, but we liked to
try talking about the main things here. We hadn't come together quickly. It took some time. But he
had already managed to tell me a great deal. I acquired a new capability from him: to accept
patiently and pur- posefuUy things that had never had any place in my own plans and had, it seemed,



no connection at all with the clearly outlined direction of my life. From childhood on, I had
somehow known that my objective was the history of the Russian Revolution and that nothing else
concerned me. To understand the Revolution I had long since required nothing beyond Marxism. I
cut myself off from everything else that came up and turned my back on it. And now fate brought me
together with Susi. He breathed a com- pletely different sort of air. And he would tell me
passionately about his own interests, and these were Estonia and democracy. And although I had
never expected to become interested in Estonia, much less bourgeois democracy, I nevertheless kept
listening and listening to his loving stories of twenty free years in that modest, work-loving, small
nation of big men whose ways were slow and set. I listened to the principles of the Estonian con-
stitution, which had been borrowed from the best of European experience, and to how their hundred-
member, one-house parUa- ment had worked. And, though the why of it wasn't clear, I began to like
it all and store it all away in my experience.

[Susi remembered me later as a strange mixture of Marxist and democrat. Yes, things were wildly
mixed up inside me at that time.]

I listened willingly to their fatal history: the tiny Estonian anvil had, from way, way back, been
caught between two hammers, the Teutons and the Slavs. Blows showered on it from East and West
in turn; there was no end to it, and there still isn't. And there was the well- known (totally unknown)
story of how we Russians wanted to take them over in one fell swoop in 1918, but they refused to
yield. And how, later on, Yudenich spoke contemptuously of their Finnish heritage, and we
ourselves christened them "White Guard Bandits." Then the Estonian gymnasium students enrolled
as volunteers. We struck at Estonia again in 1940, and again in 1941, and again in 1944. Some of
their sons were conscripted by the Russian Army, and others by the German Army, and still others
ran off into the woods. The elderly Tallinn intellectuals discussed how they might break out of that
iron ring, break away somehow, and live for themselves and by themselves. Their Premier might,
possibly, have been Tief, and their Minister of Education, say, Susi. But neither Churchill nor
Roosevelt cared about them in the least; but "Uncle Joe" did. And during the very first nights after
the Soviet armies entered Tallinn, all these dreamers were seized in their Tallinn apartments. Fifteen
of them were imprisoned in various cells of the Moscow Lubyanka, one in each, and were charged
under Article 58-2 with the criminal desire for national self-determination.

Each time we returned to the cell from our walk was like being arrested again. Even in our very
special cell the air seemed stifling after the outdoors. And it would have been good to have a snack
afterward too. But it was best not to think about it — not at all. It was bad if one of the prisoners who
received food parcels tactlessly spread out his treasures at the wrong time and began to eat. All right,
we'll develop self-control! It was bad, too, to be betrayed by the author of the book you were
reading — if he began to drool over food in the greatest detail. Get away from me, Gogol! Get away
from me, Chekhov, too! They both had too much food in their books. "He didn't really feel like
eating, but nevertheless he ate a helping of veal and drank some beer." The son-of-a-bitch! It was
better to read spiritual things! Dostoyevsky was the right kind of author for prisoners to read! Yet
even in Dostoyevsky you could find that passage "The chil- dren went hungry. For several days they
had seen nothing but bread and sausage."

The Lubyanka library was the prison's principal ornament. True, the librarian was repulsive — a
blond spinster with a horsy build, who did everything possible to make herself ugly. Her face was so
whitened that it looked like a doll's immobile mask; her lips were purple; and her plucked eyebrows
were black. (You might say that was her own business, but we would have enjoyed it more if she had
been a charmer. However, perhaps the chief of the Lubyanka had already taken that into
consideration?) But here was a wonder: once every ten days, when she came to take away our books,
she listened to our requests for new ones! She heard us out in that same machinelike, inhuman
Lubyanka manner, and it was impossible to judge whether she had heard the authors' names or the
titles, whether, indeed, she had heard our words at all. She would leave, and we would experience
several hours of nervous but happy expectation. During those hours all the books we had returned



were leafed through and checked. They were examined in case we had left pinpricks or dots
underneath certain letters — for there was such a method of clandestine intramural communication —
or we had underlined passages we liked with a fingernail. We were worried even though we were
totally innocent. They might come to us and say that they had discovered pinpricks. They were
always right, of course; and, as always, no proof was required. And on that basis we could be
deprived of books for three months — if, indeed, they didn't put the whole cell on a punishment-cell
regime. It would be very sad to have to do without books during the best and brightest of our prison
months, before we were tossed into the pit of camp. Indeed, we were not only afraid; we actually
trembled, just as we had in youth after sending a love letter, while we waited for an answer. Will it
come or not? And what will it say?

Then at last the books arrived and determined the pattern of the next ten days. They would decide
whether we would chiefly concentrate on reading or, if they had brought us trash, be spend- ing more
time in conversation. They brought exactly as many books as there were people in the cell, this being
the sort of calculation appropriate to a bread cutter and not a librarian: one book for one person, six
books for six persons. The cells with the largest number of prisoners were the best off.

Sometimes the spinster would fill our orders miraculously. But even when she was careless about
them, things could turn out interestingly. Because the library of the Big Lubyanka was unique. In all
probability it had been assembled out of confiscated private libraries. The bibliophiles who had
collected those books had al- ready rendered up their souls to God. But the main thing was that while
State Security had been busy censoring and emasculating all the libraries of the nation for decades, it
forgot to dig in its own bosom. Here, in its very den, one could read Zamyatin, Pil- nyak,
Panteleimon Romanov, and any volume at all of the com- plete works of Merezhkovsky. (Some
people wisecracked that they allowed us to read forbidden books because they already re- garded us
as dead. But I myself think that the Lubyanka librarians hadn't the faintest concept of what they were
giving us — they were simply lazy and ignorant.)

We used to read intensively during the hours before lunch. But it sometimes happened that a single
phrase would get you going and drive you to pace from window to door, from door to window. And
you would want to show somebody what you had read and explain what it implied, and then an
argument would get started. It was a time for sharp arguments, as well!

I often argued with Yuri Y.

On that March morning when they led the five of us into palatial Cell 53, they had just added a sixth
prisoner to our group.

He entered, it seemed, like a spirit, and his shoes made no noise against the floor. He entered and,
not sure that he could stay on his feet, leaned against the door frame. The bulb had been turned off in
the cell and the morning light was dim. How- ever, the newcomer did not have his eyes wide open.
He squinted, and he kept silent.

The cloth of his military field jacket and trousers did not identify him as coming from the Soviet, or

the German, or the Polish, or the English Army. The structure of his face was elong- ated. There was
very little Russian in it. And he was painfully thin. And not only very thin but very tall.

We spoke to him in Russian — and he kept silent. Susi addressed him in German — he still kept silent.

Fastenko tried French and English — with the same result. Only gradually did a smile appear on his
emaciated, yellow, half -dead face — the only such smile I had ever seen in my life.

"Pee-eeple," he uttered weakly, as if he were coming out of a faint, or as if he had been waiting all

night long to be executed. And he reached out his weak, emaciated hand. It held a small bundle tied
up in a rag. Our stoolie understood instantly what was in it, threw himself on it, grabbed it, and



opened it up on the table. There was half a pound of light tobacco. He had instantly man- aged to roll
himself a cigarette four times the size of an ordi- nary one.

Thus, after three weeks' confinement in a cellar box, Yuri Nikolayevich Y. made his appearance in
our cell.

From the time of the 1929 incidents on the Chinese Eastern Railroad, the song had been sung
throughout the land:

Its steel breast brushing aside our enemies.
The 27th stands on guard!

The chief of artillery of this 27th Infantry Division, formed back in the Civil War, was the Tsarist
officer Nikolai Y. (I re- membered the name because it was the name of one of the authors of our
artillery textbook.) In a heated freight car that had been converted into living quarters, and always
accompanied by his wife, this artillery officer had crossed and recrossed the Volga and the Urals,
sometimes moving east and sometimes west. It was in this heated freight car that his son, Yuri, bom
in 1917, and twin brother, therefore, of the Revolution itself, spent his first years.

That was a long time ago. Since then his father had settled in Leningrad, in the Academy, and lived
well and frequented high circles, and the son graduated from the officer candidate school. During the
Finnish War, Yuri wanted desperately to fight for the Motherland, and friends of his father got him
an appointment as an aide on an army staff. Yuri did not have to crawl on his stomach to destroy the
Finns' concrete artillery emplacements, nor get trapped and encircled on a scouting mission, nor
freeze in the snow under sniper bullets — but his service was nevertheless rewarded, not with some
ordinary decoration, but with the Order of the Red Banner, which fitted neatly on his field shirt. Thus
he completed the Finnish War in full consciousness of its justice and his own part in it.

But he didn't have things so easy in the next war. The battery he commanded was surrounded near
Luga. They scattered and were caught and driven off into prisoner-of-war camps. Yuri found himself
in a concentration camp for officers near Vilnius.

In every life there is one particular event that is decisive for the entire person — for his fate, his
convictions, his passions. Two years in that camp shook Yuri up once and for all. It is impossible to
catch with words or to circumvent with syllogisms what that camp was. That was a camp to die in —
and whoever did not die was compelled to reach certain conclusions.

Among those who could survive were the Ordners — the in- ternal camp police or Polizei — chosen
from among the prisoners. Of course, Yuri did not become an Ordner. The cooks managed to survive
too. The translators could survive also — they needed them. But though Yuri had a superb command
of conversational German, he concealed this fact. He realized that a translator would have to betray
his fellow prisoners. One could also post- pone dying by digging graves, but others stronger and
more dexterous got those jobs. Yuri announced that he was an artist. And, actually, as part of his
varied education at home, he had been given lessons in painting. Yuri didn't paint badly in oils, and
only his desire to follow in his father's footsteps — for he had been proud of his father — had kept him
from entering art school.

Together with an elderly artist (I regret that I don't remember his name) he occupied a separate room

in the barracks. And there Yuri painted for nothing schmaltzy pictures such as Nero's Feast and the
Chorus of Elves and the like for the German officers on the commandant's staff. In return, he was
given food. The slops for which the POW officers stood in line with their mess tins from 6 A.M. on,
while the Ordners beat them with sticks and the cooks with ladles, were not enough to sustain life. At
evening, Yuri could see from the windows of their room the one and only picture for which his
artistic talent had been given him: the evening mist hovering above a swampy meadow en- circled by



barbed wire; a multitude of bonfires; and, around the bonfires, beings who had once been Russian
officers but had now become beastlike creatures who gnawed the bones of dead horses, who baked
patties from potato rinds, who smoked manure and were all swarming with lice. Not all those two-
legged creatures had died as yet. Not all of them had yet lost the capacity for in- telUgible speech,
and one could see in the crimson reflections of the bonfires how a belated understanding was
dawning on those faces which were descending to the Neanderthal.

Wormwood on the tongue! That life which Yuri had preserved was no longer precious to him for its
own sake. He was not one of those who easily agree to forget. No, if he was going to survive, he was
obliged to draw certain conclusions.

It was already clear to them that the Germans were not the heart of the matter, or at least not the
Germans alone; that among the POW's of many nationalities only the Soviets lived like this and died
like this. None were worse off than the Soviets. Even the Poles, even the Yugoslavs, existed in far
more tolerable condi- tions; and as for the English and the Norwegians, they were in- undated by the
International Red Cross with parcels from home. They didn't even bother to line up for the German
rations. Wher- ever there were Allied POW camps next door, their prisoners, out of kindness, threw
our men handouts over the fence, and our prisoners jumped on these gifts like a pack of dogs on a
bone.

The Russians were carrying the whole war on their shoulders — and this was the Russian lot. Why?

Gradually, explanations came in from here and there: it turned out that the U.S.S.R. did not
recognize as binding Russia's signa- ture to the Hague Convention on war prisoners. That meant that
the U.S.S.R. accepted no obligations at all in the treatment of war prisoners and took no steps for the
protection of its own soldiers who had been captured.

[We did not recognize that 1907 Convention until 1955. Incidentally, in his diary for 1915,

Melgunov reports rumors that Russia would not let aid go through for its prisoners in Germany and
that their living conditions were worse than those of all other Allied prisoners — simply in order to
prevent rumors about the good life of war prisoners inducing our soldiers to surrender willingly.
There was some sort of continuity of ideas here. (Melgunov, Vos- pominaniya i Dnevniki, Vol. I, pp.
199 and 203.)]

The U.S.S.R. did not recognize the In- ternational Red Cross. The U.S.S.R. did not recognize its own
soldiers of the day before: it did not intend to give them any help as POW's.

And the heart of Yuri, enthusiastic twin of the October Revo- lution, grew cold. In their barracks
room, he and the elderly artist clashed and argued. It was difficult for Yuri to accept. Yuri re- sisted.
But the old man kept peeling off layer after layer. What was it all about? Stalin? But wasn't it too
much to ascribe every- thing to Stalin, to those stubby hands? He who draws a con- elusion only
halfway fails to draw it at all. What about the rest of them? The ones right next to Stalin and below
him, and every- where around the country — all those whom the Motherland had authorized to speak
for it?

What is the right course of action if our mother has sold us to the gypsies? No, even worse, thrown
us to the dogs? Does she really remain our mother? If a wife has become a whore, are we really still
bound to her in fidelity? A Motherland that betrays its soldiers — is that really a Motherland?

And everything turned topsy-turvy for Yuri! He used to take pride in his father — now he cursed
him! For the first time he began to consider that his father had, in essence, betrayed his oath to that
army in which he had been brought up — had betrayed it in order to help establish this system which
now betrayed its own soldiers. Why, then, was Yuri bound by his own oath to that traitorous system?



When, in the spring of 1943, recruiters from the first Byelorus- sian "legions" put in an appearance,
some POW's signed up with them to escape starvation. Yuri went with them out of conviction, with a
clear mind. But he didn't stay in the legion for long. As the saying goes: "Once they've skinned you,
there's no point in grieving over the wool." By this time Yuri had given up hiding his excellent
knowledge of German, and soon a certain Chief, a German from near Kassel, who had been assigned
to create an espionage school with an accelerated wartime output, took Yuri as his right-hand man.
And that was how Yuri began the down- ward slide he had not foreseen. That was how things got
turned around. Yuri passionately desired to free his Motherland, and what did they do but shove him
into training spies? The Germans had their own plans. Just where could one draw the line? Which
step was the fatal one? Yuri became a lieutenant in the German Army. He traveled through
Germany, in German uniform, spent some time in Berlin, visited Russian emigres, and read authors
Uke Bunin, Nabokov, Aldanov, Amfiteatrov, whose works were forbidden at home. Yuri had
anticipated that in all their writing» in Bunin's, for example, the blood flowing from Russia's living
wounds would pour from every page. What was wrong with them? To what did they devote their
unutterably precious free- dom? To the female body, to ecstasy, sunsets, the beauty of noble brows,
to anecdotes going back to dusty years. They wrote as if there had been no revolution in Russia, or as
if it were too com- plex for them to explain. They left it to young Russian people to find for
themselves what was highest in life. And Yuri dashed back and forth, in a hurry to see, in a hurry to
know, and mean- while, in accordance with ancient Russian tradition, he kept drowning his
confusion more and more often and more and more deeply in vodka.

What was their spy school really? It was, of course, not a real one. All they could be taught in six
months was to master the parachute, the use of explosives, and the use of portable radios. The
Germans put no special trust in them. In sending them across the lines they were simply whistling in
the dark. And for those dying, hopelessly abandoned Russian POW's, those schools, in Yuri's
opinion, were a good way out. The men ate their fill, got new warm clothing, and, in addition, had
their pockets stuffed with Soviet money. The students (and their teachers) acted as if all this
nonsense were genuine — as if they would actually carry out spying missions in the Soviet rear, blow
up the designated objectives, get back in touch with the Germans via radio, and return to the German
lines. But in reality in their eyes this school was simply a means of sidestepping death and captivity.
They wanted to live, but not at the price of shooting their own compatriots at the front.

[Of course, our Soviet interrogators did not accept this line of reasoning. What right did they have to
want to live — at a time when privileged families in the Soviet rear lived well without collaborating?
No one ever thought of considering that these boys had refused to take up German arms against their
own people. For playing spies, they were nailed with the very worst and most serious charges of
all — Article 58-6, plus sabotage with intent. This meant: to be held until dead.]

The Germans sent them across the front lines, and from then on their free choice depended on their
own morality and conscience. They all threw away their TNT and radio apparatus immediately. The
only point on which they differed was whether to surrender to the authorities immedi- ately, like the
snub-nosed "shhpy" I had encountered at army counterintelligence headquarters, or whether to get
drunk first and have some fun squandering all that free money. None of them ever recrossed the front
lines to the Germans.

Suddenly, as the new year of 1945 approached, one smart fellow did return and reported he had
carried out his assignment. (Just go and check on it!) He created a sensation. The Chief hadn't the
slightest doubt that SMERSH had sent him back and decided to shoot him. (The fate of a
conscientious spy!) But Yuri insisted that he be given a decoration instead and held up as an example
to the others taking the course. The returned "spy" invited Yuri to drink a quart of vodka with him
and, crimson from drink, leaned across the table and disclosed: "Yuri Nikola- yevich! The Soviet
Command promises you forgiveness if you will come over to us immediately."

Yuri trembled. And that heart which had already grown hard, which had renounced everything, was



flooded with warmth. The Motherland? Accursed, unjust, but nonetheless still precious!
Forgiveness? And he could go back to his own family? And walk along Kamennoostrovsky in
Leningrad? All right, so what? We are Russian! If you will forgive us, we will return, and we will
behave ourselves, oh, how well! That year and a half since he had left the POW camp had not
brought Yuri happiness. He did not repent, but he could see no future either. And when, while
drinking, he encountered other such unrepentant Russians, he learned that they realized clearly that
they had nothing to stand on. It wasn't real life. The Germans were twisting them to suit themselves.
But now, when the Germans were obviously losing the war, Yuri had been offered an out. His Chief,
who liked him, confided that he had a second estate in Spain which they could head for together if
the German Reich went up in smoke. But there across the table sat his drunken compatriot, coaxing
him at the risk of his own life: "Yuri Nikolayevich! The Soviet Command values your experience
and knowledge. They want you to tell them about the organization of the German in- telligence
service."

For two weeks Yuri was torn by hesitation. But during the Soviet offensive beyond the Vistula, after
he had led his school well out of the way, he ordered them to turn in to a quiet Polish farm, lined
them all up, and declared: "I am going over to the Soviet side! There is a free choice for everyone!"
And these sad-sack spies, with the milk hardly dry on their lips, who just one hour before had
pretended loyalty to the German Reich, now cried out with enthusiasm: "Hurrah! Us too!" (They
were shout- ing "hurrah" for their future lives at hard labor.)

Then the entire spy school hid until the arrival of the Soviet tanks; and then came SMERSH. Yuri
saw his boys no more. They took him off by himself and gave him ten days to describe the whole
history of the school, the programs, the sabotage assignments. He really thought that they valued his
"experience and knowledge." They were already talking about his going home to his family.

Only when he arrived at the Lubyanka did he realize that even in Salamanca he would have been
closer to his native Neva. He could now await being shot, or, in any case, a sentence of cer- tainly
not less than twenty years.

So immutably does a human being surrender to the mist of the Motherland! Just as a tooth will not
stop aching until the nerve is killed, so is it with us; we shall probably not stop responding to the call
of the Motherland until we swallow arsenic. The lotus- eaters in the Odyssey knew of a certain lotus
for that purpose. . . .

In all, Yuri spent three weeks in our cell. I argued with him during all those weeks. I said that our

Revolution was magnificent and just; that only its 1929 distortion was terrible. He looked at me
regretfully, compressing his nervous lips: before trying our hands at revolution, we should have
exterminated the bedbugs in this country! (Sometimes, oddly, he and Fastenko arrived at the same
conclusions, approaching them from such different be- ginnings.) I said there had been a long period
in which the people in charge of everything important in our country had been people of
unimpeachably lofty intentions, and totally dedicated. He said that from the very beginning they
were all cut from the same cloth as Stalin. (We agreed that Stalin was a gangster.) I praised Gorky to
the skies. What a smart man he had been! How correct his point of view! What a great artist he was!
And Yuri parried. He was an insignificant, terribly boring personality! He invented himself; he
invented his heroes; and his books were fabrications from beginning to end. Lev Tolstoi — he was the
king of our literature.

As a result of these daily arguments, vehement because of our youth, he and I were never able to
become really close or to discern and accept in each other more than we rejected.

They took him out of our cell; and since then, no matter how often I have inquired, I have found no
one who was imprisoned with him in the Butyrki, and no one who encountered him in a transit
prison. Even the rank-and-file Vlasov men have all dis- appeared without a trace, under the earth.



most likely, and even now some of them do not have the documents they need in order to leave the
northern wastes. But even among them, the fate of Yuri Y. was not a rank-and-file fate.

At long last our Lubyanka lunch arrived. Long before it got to us we could hear the cheery clatter in
the corridor, and then, as in a restaurant, they brought in a tray with two aluminum plates — not
bowls — for each prisoner. One plate held a ladleful of soup and the other a ladleful of the thinnest
kind of thin gruel, with no fat in it.

In his first excitement, a prisoner couldn't get anything down his throat. There were those who didn't
touch their bread for several days, who didn't know where to put it. But gradually one's appetite
returned; and then a chronically famished state ensued that became almost uncontrollable. Then, if
one managed to get it under control, one's stomach shrank and adapted itself to inadequate food, at
which point the meager Lubyanka fare became just right. One needed to have self-control to achieve
this, and also needed to stop looking around to see who might be eating something extra. All those
extremely dangerous prison conversations about food had to be outlawed, and one had to try to lift
oneself, as far as possible, into higher spheres. At the Lubyanka this was made easier by our being
permitted two hours of rest after lunch — something else that was astonishingly resort- like. We lay
down, our backs to the peephole, set up open books for appearance' sake, and dozed off. Sleep was
forbidden, strictly speaking, and the guards could see that the pages of the books hadn't been turned
for a long time. But ordinarily they did not knock during this period. (The explanation for this
humanitarian- ism was that whoever wasn't resting during these hours was under- going
interrogation. Thus, for those who were stubborn, who had not signed the depositions, the contrast
was unmistakable: they returned to the cell at the very end of the rest period.)

And sleep was the very best thing for hunger and anguish. One's organism cooled off, and the brain
stopped recapitulating one's mistakes over and over again.

Then they brought in dinner — another ladle of gruel. Life was setting all its gifts before you. After

that, you were not going to get anything to eat in the five or six hours before bedtime, but that was
not so terrible; it was easy to get used to not eating in the evenings. That has long been known in
military medicine. And in reserve regiments they don't have anything to eat in the evening.

Then came the time for the evening visit to the toilet, for which, in all likelihood, you had waited, all
atremble, all day. How relieved, how eased, the whole world suddenly became! How the great
questions all simplified themselves at the same instant — did you feel it?

Oh, the weightless Lubyanka evenings! (Only weightless, in- cidentally, if you were not awaiting a
night interrogation.) A weightless body, just sufficiently satisfied by soup so that the soul did not feel
oppressed by it. What light, free thoughts! It was as if we had been lifted up to the heights of Sinai,
and there the truth manifested itself to us from out the fire. Was it not of this that Pushkin dreamed:

I want to live to think and suffer!

And there we suffered, and we thought, and there was nothing else in our lives. How easy it turned
out to be to attain that ideal.

Some evenings I would get involved in arguments, withdraw- ing from a chess game with Susi or
from a book. Again I would have the sharpest quarrels with Yuri, because the questions were all
explosive ones — for example, the question of the outcome of the war. The jailer, without any word
or change of expression, would come in and pull down the dark-blue blackout blind on the window.
And then, out there on the other side of the blind, evening Moscow would begin to send up salutes.
And just as we could not see the salutes lighting up the heavens, we were unable to see the map of
Europe. Yet we tried to picture it in all its details and to guess which cities had been taken. Yuri was
espe- cially tormented by those salutes. Appealing to fate to correct his own mistakes, he assured us



that the war was by no means fin- ished and that the Red Army and the Anglo-American forces
would now go for each other's throats: that the real war would really begin now. The others in the
cell took a greedy interest in this prediction. How would such a conflict end? Yuri claimed it would
end with the easy destruction of the Red Army. (Would this result in our liberation or our
execution?) I objected to this, and we got into heated arguments. It was his contention that our army
was worn down, bled white, poorly supplied, and, most importantly, that it would not fight with its
usual determination against the Allies. I, however, insisted, on the basis of the units I had been
familiar with, that the army was not so much worn down as experienced, that it had now become
both strong and mean, and that in such an event it would crush the Allies even more thoroughly than
it had the Germans. "Never," cried Yuri in a half- whisper. "And what about the Ardennes?" I
answered in a half- whisper. Fastenko interrupted us, ridiculing us both, informing us that we did not
understand the West and that no one, now or ever, could compel the Allied armies to fight against us.

However, in the evening we didn't want to argue so much as to hear something interesting that might
bring us closer together, and to talk in a spirit of fellowship.

One favorite subject of conversation was prison traditions, how it used to he in prison. We had
Fastenko and were therefore able to hear these stories at first hand. What dismayed us most of all
was to learn that it had previously been an honor to be a political prisoner, and that it was not only
their relatives who stuck by them and refused to renounce them, but that girls who had never even
met them came to visit them, pretending for that purpose to be their fiancees. And what about the
once universal tradition of gifts for the prisoners on holidays? No one in Russia ever broke the
Lenten fast without first taking gifts for unknown prisoners to the common prison kitchen. They
brought in Christ- mas hams, tarts, and kulichi — the special Russian Easter cakes. One poor old lady
even used to bring a dozen colored Easter eggs; it made her feel better. And where had all that
Russian generosity gone? It had been replaced by political consciousness. That was how cruelly and
implacably they had terrified our people and cured them of taking thought for and caring for those
who were suffering. Today it would seem silly to do such a thing. If it was proposed today that some
institution organize a preholiday collection of gifts for prisoners in the local prison, it would be
virtually considered an anti-Soviet revolt! That's how far we have gone along the road to being
brutalized!

And what about those holiday gifts? Were they only a matter of tasty food? More importantly, those
gifts gave the prisoners the warm feeling that people in freedom were thinking about them and were
concerned for them.

Fastenko told us that even in the Soviet period a Political Red Cross had existed. We found this
difficult to imagine. It wasn't that we thought he was telling us an untruth. Somehow we just couldn't
picture such a thing. He told us that Y. P. Peshkova, taking advantage of her personal immunity, had
traveled abroad, collected money there (you'd not collect much here), and then seen to it that
foodstuffs were bought in Russia for political pris- oners who had no relatives. For all political
prisoners? And he explained at this point that the KR's — the so-called "Counter- Revolutionaries" —
engineers and priests, for example, weren't included, but only members of former political parties.
Well, why didn't you say so right away? Yes, and then for the most part the Political Red Cross,
except Peshkova, was itself liquidated and its staff imprisoned.

It was also very pleasant, on those evenings when one wasn't expecting interrogation, to talk about
getting out of prison. Yes, they said there had been astonishing instances when they did release

someone. One day they took Z v from our cell, "with his things" — perhaps to free him? But his

interrogation could not have been completed so swiftly. Ten days later he returned. They had
dragged him off to Lefortovo. When he got there, he had evidently begun to sign things very quickly.
So they brought him back to us. "Now if they should )ust release you," we would say to a fellow
prisoner, "since your case, after all, isn't very serious, as you yourself say, then you must promise to
go see my wife and, to show you've done it, tell her, let's say, to put two apples in my next parcel. . .



. But there aren't any apples anywhere right now, so tell her to put in three bagels. But then there
mightn't be any bagels in Moscow either. So all right, it will just have to be four potatoes!" (That's
how the discussion went, and then they actually did take N. off, "with his things," and M. got four
potatoes in his next parcel. Truly astonishing! It was more than a coincidence! So they had really let
him go! And his case was much more serious than mine. So maybe soon . . . However, what really
happened was that M.'s wife brought five potatoes, but one of them got crushed in her bag, and N.
was in the hold of a ship en route to the Kolyma. )

And so it went. We talked about all kinds of things and recalled something amusing, and it was all
very jolly and delightful to be among interesting people who were so different from those you used
to spend your life with, and who came from outside your own circle of experience. Meanwhile the
silent evening check-up had come and gone, and they had taken eyeglasses away and the light bulb
had blinked three times. That meant that bedtime would be in five minutes.

Quick! Quick! Grab a blanket! Just as you never knew at the front when a hail of shells would begin
to fall all around you, here you didn't know which would be your fateful interrogation night. And we
would lie down with one arm on top of the blanket and try to expel the whirlwind of thought from
our heads. Go to sleep!

And at a certain moment on an April evening, soon after we had seen Yuri off, the lock rattled.
Hearts tightened. For whom had they come? Now the jailer would whisper: "Name with 'S'? Name
with 'Z'?" But the guard did not whisper anything. The door closed. We raised our heads. There was
a newcomer at the door: on the thin side, young, in a cheap blue suit and a dark-blue cap. He had
nothing with him. He looked around in a state of confusion.

"What's the cell number?" he asked in alarm.

"Fifty-three."

He shuddered a bit.

"Are you from freedom?" we asked.

"No!" He shook his head in a painful sort of way.

"When were you arrested?"

"Yesterday morning."

We roared. He had a very gentle, innocent sort of face, and his eyebrows were nearly white.
"What for?"

(It was an unfair question. One could not really expect an answer. )
"Oh, I don't know. . . . Nothing much."

That was how they all replied. Everyone here was imprisoned because of nothing much. And to the
newly arrested prisoner his own case always seemed especially nothing much.

"But anyway, what was it?"

"Well, you see, I wrote a proclamation. To the Russian peo- pie."
"Whaaat?"

(None of us had ever run into that sort of "nothing much.")

"Are they going to shoot me?" His face grew longer. He kept pulling at the visor of the cap he had
still not taken off.



"Well, no, probably not," we reassured him. "They don't shoot anyone nowadays. They give out
tenners — every time the clock strikes."

"Are you a worker? Or a white-collar employee?" asked the Social Democrat, true to his class
principles.

"A worker."

Fastenko reached out a hand to him and triumphantly pro- claimed to me: "You see, Aleksandr
Isayevich, that's the mood of the working class!"

He turned away to go to sleep, assuming that there was no- where else to go from there and nothing
else to listen to.

But he was wrong.

"What do you mean, a proclamation? Just like that? Without any reason? In whose name was it
issued?"

"In my own."

"And who are you?"

The newcomer smiled with embarrassment: "The Emperor, Mikhail."

An electric shock ran through us all. Once again we raised ourselves on our cots and looked at him.
No, his shy, thin face was not in the least like the face of Mikhail Romanov. And then his age too . . .

"Tomorrow, tomorrow. Time to sleep now," said Susi sternly.

We went to sleep, confident that the two hours before the mom- ing bread ration were not going to
be boring.

They brought in a cot and bedding for the Emperor, and he lay down quietly next to the latrine
bucket.

In 1916 a portly stranger, an elderly man with a light-brown beard, entered the home of the Moscow
locomotive engineer Belov and said to the engineer's pious wife: "Pelageya! You have a year-old
son. Take good care of him for the Lord. The hour will come — and I will come to you again." Then
he left.

Pelageya did not have the faintest idea who this man was. But he had spoken so clearly and
authoritatively that her mother's heart accepted his word as law. And she cared for her child like the
apple of her eye. Viktor grew up to be quiet, obedient, and pious; and he often saw visions of the
angels and the Holy Virgin. But, as he grew up, these visions became less frequent. The elderly man
did not come again. Viktor learned to be a chauffeur, and in 1936 he was taken into the army and
sent off to Birobidzhan, where he was stationed in an auto transport company. He was not at all
overly familiar or cheeky, and perhaps it was his quiet demeanor and modesty, so untypical of a
chauffeur, which at- tracted a civilian girl employee. But the commander of his platoon was after the
same girl and found himself out in the cold because of Viktor. At this time, Marshal Bliicher came to
their area for maneuvers and his personal chauffeur fell seriously ill. Bliicher ordered the commander
of the motor company to send him the best driver in the company; the company commander
summoned the platoon commander, who immediately latched onto the idea of dumping his rival,
Belov. (That's the way it often is in the army. The person who deserves promotion doesn't get it, and



the person they want to get rid of does.) In addition, Belov was sober, a hard worker, and reliable —
he wouldn't let them down.

Blucher liked Belov. So Belov stayed with him. Soon Bliicher was summoned to Moscow on a
plausible pretext. This was how they separated the marshal from his power base in the Far East
before arresting him. He had brought his own chauffeur, Belov, to Moscow with him. Having lost his
boss, Belov then landed in the Kremlin garage and began chauffeuring, sometimes for Mi- khailov
(of the Komsomol), sometimes for Lozovsky or some- body else in the leadership, and, finally, for
Khrushchev. He had a close view of things — and he told us a lot, too, about the feasts, the morals,
the security precautions. As a representative of the rank-and-file Moscow proletariat, he was also
present at the trial of Bukharin in the House of the Unions. Of all those for whom he worked, he
spoke well only of Khrushchev. Only in Khru- shchev's home was the chauffeur seated at the family
table instead of being put in the kitchen. Only there, in those years, did he find the simplicity of the
workingman's life preserved. Khru- shchev, who enjoyed life hugely, also became attached to Viktor
Alekseyevich, and in 1938, when he left for the Ukraine, he tried to get him to go along. "I would
have stayed with Khrushchev forever," said Viktor Alekseyevich. But for some reason he felt he
should remain in Moscow.

For a while in 1941, before the beginning of the war, he was not employed in the government garage
and, having no one to protect him, he was taken into military service. But because his health was
poor, he was not sent to the front but to a labor bat- talion. First they went on foot to Inza, to dig
trenches and build roads there. After his secure and prosperous life of the previous few years he
found it painful to have his nose shoved in the dirt. He drank a full draft of grief and poverty there,
and on every side he saw not only that people had not begun to live better before the war, but that
they were deeply impoverished. Just barely surviving himself, and released from the service because
of illness, he returned to Moscow and again managed to get him- self a job as chauffeur for
Shcherbakov, and after that for Sedin, People's Commissar of Petroleum.

[He used to describe how the obese Shcherbakov hated to see people around when he arrived at his
Informburo, so they temporarily removed all those who were working in the offices he had to walk
through. Grunting be- cause of his fat, he would lean down and pull back a comer of the carpet. And
the whole Informburo caught it if he found any dust there.]

But Sedin embezzled funds to the tune of 35 million and was quietly removed. And Belov was once
again out of a job driving for the leaders. He became a chauffeur at an automobile depot, and in his
spare time he used to moonlight with his car on the road to Krasnaya Pakhra.

But his thoughts were already centered elsewhere. In 1943 he had been visiting his mother. She was
doing the laundry and had gone out to the hydrant with her pails. The door opened and a portly
stranger, an old man with a white beard, entered the house. He crossed himself at the ikon there,
looked sternly at. Belov, and said to him: "Hail, Mikhail. God gives you his bless- ing!" Belov
replied: "My name is Viktor." "But," the old man continued, "you are destined to become Mikhail,
the Emperor of Holy Russia!" Just then Viktor's mother returned and half- collapsed in fright,
spilling her pails. It was the very same old man who had come to her twenty-seven years before. He
had turned white in the meantime, but it was he. "God bless you, Pelageya, you have preserved your
son," said the old man. And he took the future Emperor aside, like a patriarch preparing to enthrone
him, and announced to the astonished young man that in 1953 there would be a change in rule and
that he would be- come Emperor of All Russia.

[The prophetic old man made only one mistake. He confused the chauffeur with his former
employer.]

(That is why the number of our cell, 53, shocked him so.) To this end, the old man told him, he was
to begin to gather his forces in 1948. The old man didn't instruct him as to how to gather his forces.



He departed, and Viktor Alekseyevich didn't get around to asking.

All the peace and simplicity of his life were lost to him now. Perhaps some other individual would
have recoiled from the ambitious program, but Viktor, as it happened, had rubbed shoulders with the
highest of the high. He had seen all those Mikhailovs, Shcherbakovs, Sedins, and he had heard a lot
from other chauffeurs, too, and he had gotten it clear in his own mind that nothing in the least
unusual was required — in fact, just the reverse.

The newly anointed Tsar, quiet, conscientious, sensitive, like Fyodor Ivanovich, the last of the line of
Ryurik, felt on his brow the heavy pressure of the crown of Monomakh. All around him were the
people's poverty and grief, for which he had not until now borne any responsibility. Now all this lay
upon his shoulders, and he was to blame for the fact that this misery still existed. It seemed strange
to him to wait until 1948, and, therefore, in that very autumn of 1943, he wrote his first proclamation
to the Russian people and read it to four of his fellow workers in the garage of the People's
Commissariat of Petroleum.

We had surrounded Viktor Alekseyevich from early morning, and he had meekly told us all this. We
had still not fathomed his childish trustfulness — we were absorbed in his unusual story and — it was
our fault — we forgot to warn him about the stoolie. In fact, we never even thought for one minute
that there was any- thing in the naive and simple story he had told us that the inter- rogator didn't
already know.

The instant the story ended, Kramarenko began demanding to be taken either to the "chief of the
prison for tobacco" or else to the doctor. At any rate, they summoned him quickly. And as soon as he
got there he put the finger on those four workers in the garage of the People's Commissariat of
Petroleum — whose existence no one would ever have suspected. (The next day, re- turning from his
interrogation, Belov was astonished that the interrogator knew about them. And that's when it hit us.)
Those workers had heard the proclamation and approved it all, and no one had turned in the
Emperor! But he himself felt that it was too early, and he burned it.

A year passed. Viktor Alekseyevich was working as a mechanic in the garage of an automobile
depot. In the fall of 1944, he again wrote a proclamation and gave it to ten people to read —
chauffeurs and lathe operators. All of them approved it. And no one turned him in. (It was a
surprising thing, indeed, that not one person in that group of ten had turned him in, in that period of
ubiquitous stool pigeons! Fastenko had not been mistaken in his deductions about the "mood of the
working class.") True, in this case the Emperor had used some innocent tricks. He had thrown out
hints that a strong arm inside the government was on his side. And he had promised his supporters
travel assignments to rally monarchic sentiment at the grass roots.

Months went by. The Emperor entrusted his secret to two girls at the garage. But this time there was

no misfire. These girls turned out to be ideologically sound! And Viktor Alekseye- vich's heart sank:
he had a premonition of disaster. On the Sunday after the Annunciation he went to the market,
carrying the proclamation with him. One of his sympathizers among the old workers saw him there
and said: "Viktor, you ought to burn that piece of paper for the time being; how about it?" And
Viktor felt clearly that he had written it too soon, and that he should burn it. "I'll bum it right now!
You're right." And he started home to bum it. But right there in the market two pleasant young men
called out to him: "Viktor Alekseyevich! Come along with us!" And they took him to the Lubyanka
in a private car. When they got him there, they had been in such a hurry and were so excited that
they didn't search him in the usual way, and there was a moment when the Emperor almost destroyed
his proclama- tion in the toilet. But he decided that it would be the worse for him, that they would
keep after him anyway to find out where it was. And they straightaway took him in an elevator up to
a general and a colonel, and the general with his own hands grabbed the proclamation from Viktor's
pocket.



However, it took only one interrogation for the Big Lubyanka to quiet down again. It turned out to be
not so dangerous. Ten arrests in tlie garage of the auto depot and four in the garage of the People's
Commissariat of Petroleum. The interrogation was turned over to a lieutenant colonel, who had a
good laugh as he went through the proclamation:

"You write here, Your Majesty: 'In the first spring I will instruct my Minister of Agriculture to
dissolve the collective farms.' But how are you going to divide up the tools and live- stock? You
haven't got it worked out yet. And then you also write: 'I am going to increase housing construction
and house each person next to the place he works, and I am going to raise all the workers' wages.'
And where are you going to find the money. Your Majesty? Are you going to have to run the money
off on printing presses? You are going to abolish the state loans. And then, too: 'I am going to wipe
the Kremlin from the face of the earth.' But where are you going to put your own govern- ment?
What about the building of the Big Lubyanka? Would you like to take a tour of inspection and look
it over?"

Many of the younger interrogators also stopped by to make fun of the Emperor of All Russia. They
saw nothing except comedy in all this.

And it was not always easy for us in the cell to keep a straight face. "We hope you aren't going to
forget us here in Cell No. 53," said Z v, winking at the rest of us.

Everyone laughed at him.

Viktor Alekseyevich, with his white eyebrows and innocent simplicity and his callused hands, would
treat us when he received boiled potatoes from his unfortunate mother, Pelageya, without ever
dividing them into "yours" and mine": "Come on, com- rades, eat up, eat up!"

He used to smile shyly. He understood perfectly well how uncontemporary and funny all this was —
to be the Emperor of All Russia. But what could he do if God's choice had fallen on him?

They soon removed him from our cell.

[When they introduced me to Khrushchev in 1962, 1 wanted to say to him: "Nikita Sergeyevich! You
and I have an acquaintance in common." But I told him something else, more urgent, on behalf of
former prisoners.]

Just before May 1 they took down the blackout shade on the window. The war was perceptibly
coming to an end.

That evening it was quieter than ever before in the Lubyanka. It was, I remember, almost like the
second day of Easter, since May Day and Easter came one after the other that year. All the
interrogators were out in Moscow celebrating. No one was taken to interrogation. In the silence we
could hear someone across the corridor protesting. They took him from the cell and into a box. By
listening, we could detect the location of all the doors. They left the door of the box open, and they
kept beating him a long time. In the suspended silence every blow on his soft and choking mouth
could be heard clearly.

On May 2 a thirty-gun salute roared out. That meant a Euro- pean capital. Only two had not yet been
captured — Prague and Berlin. We tried to guess which it was.

On the ninth of May they brought us our dinner at the same time as our lunch — which was done at
the Lubyanka only on May 1 and November 7.

And that is how we guessed that the war had ended.



That evening they shot off another thirty-gun salute. We then knew that there were no more capitals
to be captured. And later that same evening one more salute roared out — forty guns, I seem to
remember. And that was the end of all the ends.

Above the muzzle of our window, and from all the other cells of the Lubyanka, and from all the
windows of all the Moscow prisons, we, too, former prisoners of war and former front-line soldiers,
watched the Moscow heavens, patterned with fireworks and crisscrossed by the beams of
searchlights.

Boris Gammerov, a young antitank man, already demobilized because of wounds, with an incurable
wound in his lung, having been arrested with a group of students, was in prison that eve- ning in an
overcrowded Butyrki cell, where half the inmates were former POW's and front-line soldiers. He
described this last salute of the war in a terse eight-stanza poem, in the most ordinary Ian- guage:
how they were already lying down on their board bunks, covered with their overcoats; how they
were awakened by the noise; how they raised their heads; squinted up at the muzzle — "Oh, it's just a
salute" — and then lay down again:

And once again covered themselves with their coats.

With those same overcoats which had been in the clay of the trenches, and the ashes of bonfires, and
been torn to tatters by German shell fragments.

That victory was not for us. And that spring was not for us either.

Chapter 6

That Spring

Through the windows of the Butyrki Prison every morning and evening in June, 1945, we could hear
the brassy notes of bands not far away — coming from either Lesnaya Street or Novoslo- bodskaya.
They kept playing marches over and over.

Behind the murky green "muzzles" of reinforced glass, we stood at the wide-open but impenetrable
prison windows and listened. Were they military units that were marching? Or were they work- ers
cheerfully devoting their free time to marching practice? We didn't know, but the rumor had already
gotten through to us that preparations were under way for a big Victory Parade on Red Square on
June 22 — the fourth anniversary of the beginning of the war.

The foundation stones of a great building are destined to groan and be pressed upon; it is not for
them to crown the edifice. But even the honor of being part of the foundation was denied those
whose doomed heads and ribs had borne the first blows of this war and thwarted the foreigners'
victory, and who were now abandoned for no good reason.

"Joyful sounds mean nought to the traitor."

That spring of 1945 was, in our prisons, predominantly the spring of the Russian prisoners of war.
They passed through the prisons of the Soviet Union in vast dense gray shoals like ocean herring.
The first trace of those schools I glimpsed was Yuri Y. But I was soon entirely surrounded by their
purposeful motion, which seemed to know its own fated design.

Not only war prisoners passed through those cells. A wave of those who had spent any time in

Europe was rolling too: emigres from the Civil War; the "ostovtsy" workers recruited as laborers

by the Germans during World War II; Red Army officers who had been too astute and farsighted in
their con- elusions, so that Stalin feared they might bring European free- dom back from their



European crusade, like the Decembrists 120 years before. And yet it was the war prisoners who
consti- tuted the bulk of the wave. And among the war prisoners of various ages, most were of my
own age — not precisely my age, but the twins of October, those born along with the Revolution, who
in 1937 had poured forth undismayed to celebrate the twentieth anniversary of the Revolution, and
whose age group, at the beginning of the war, made up the standing army — which had been scattered
in a matter of weeks.

That tedious prison spring had, to the tune of the victory marches, become the spring of reckoning
for my whole genera- tion.

Over our cradles the rallying cry had resounded: "All power to the Soviets!" It was we who had
reached out our suntanned childish hands to clutch the Pioneers' bugle, and who in response to the
Pioneer challenge, "Be prepared," had saluted and an- swered: "We are always prepared!" It was we
who had smuggled weapons into Buchenwald and joined the Communist Party there. And it was we
who were now in disgrace, only because we had survived.

[Those prisoners who had been in Buchenwald and survived were, in fact, imprisoned for that very
reason in our own camps: How could you have sur- vived an annihilation camp? Something doesn't
smell right!]

Back when the Red Army had cut through East Prussia, I had seen downcast columns of returning
war prisoners — the only people around who were grieving instead of celebrating. Even then their
gloom had shocked me, though I didn't yet grasp the reason for it. I jumped down and went over to
those voluntarily formed-up columns. (Why were they marching in columns? Why had they lined
themselves up in ranks? After all, no one had compelled them to, and the war prisoners of all other
nations went home as scattered individuals. But ours wanted to return as submissively as possible.) I
was wearing a captain's shoulder boards, and they, plus the fact that I was moving forward, helped
prevent my finding out why our POW's were so sad. But then fate turned me around and sent me in
the wake of those prisoners along the same path they had taken. I had already marched with them
from army counterintelligence headquarters to the head- quarters at the front, and when we got there
I had heard their first stories, which I didn't yet understand; and then Yuri Y. told me the whole
thing. And here beneath the domes of the brick-red Butyrki castle, I felt that the story of these
several mil- lion Russian prisoners had got me in its grip once and for all, like a pin through a
specimen beetle. My own story of landing in prison seemed insignificant. I stopped regretting my
tom-off shoulder boards. It was mere chance that had kept me from end- ing up exactly where these
contemporaries of mine had ended. I came to understand that it was my duty to take upon my
shoulders a share of their common burden — and to bear it to the last man, until it crushed us. I now
felt as if I, too, had fallen prisoner at the Solovyev crossing, in the Kharkov encirclement, in the
quarries of Kerch, and, hands behind my back, had carried my Soviet pride behind the barbed wire of
the concentration camps; that I, too, had stood for hours in the freezing cold for a ladle of cold Kawa
(an ersatz coffee) and had been left on the ground for dead, without even reaching the kettle; that in
Oflag 68 (Suwalki) I had used my hands and the lid of a mess tin to dig a bell-shaped (upturned, that
is) foxhole, so as not to have to spend the winter on the open field; and that a maddened prisoner had
crawled up to me as I lay dying to gnaw on the still warm flesh beneath my arm; and with every new
day of exacerbated, famished consciousness, lying in a barracks riddled with typhus, or at the barbed
wire of the neighboring camp for English POW's, the clear thought had penetrated my dying brain:
Soviet Russia has renounced her dying children. She had needed them, "proud sons of Russia," as
long as they let the tanks roll over them and it was still possible to rouse them to attack. But to feed
them once they were war prisoners? Extra mouths. And extra witnesses to humiliating defeats.

Sometimes we try to lie but our tongue will not allow us to. These people were labeled traitors, but a

remarkable slip of the tongue occurred — on the part of the judges, prosecutors, and interrogators.
And the convicted prisoners, the entire nation, and the newspapers repeated and reinforced this
mistake, involuntarily letting the truth out of the bag. They intended to declare them "traitors to the



Motherland." But they were universally referred to, in speech and in writing, even in the court
documents, as "traitors of the Motherland."

You said it! They were not traitors to her. They were her traitors. It was not they, the unfortunates,
who had betrayed the Motherland, but their calculating Motherland who had betrayed them, and not
just once but thrice.

The first time she betrayed them was on the battlefield, through ineptitude — when the government,

so beloved by the Mother- land, did everything it could to lose the war: destroyed the lines of
fortifications; set up the whole air force for annihilation; dis- mantled the tanks and artillery;
removed the effective generals; and forbade the armies to resist.

[Now, after twenty-seven years, the first honest work on this subject has appeared — P. G.
Grigorenko, "A Letter to the Magazine Problems of the His- tory of the Communist Party of the
Soviet Union" samizdat, 1968 — and such works are going to multiply from here on out. Not all the
witnesses died. And soon no one will call Stalin's government anything but a government of insanity
and treason.]

And the war prisoners were the men whose bodies took the blow and stopped the Wehrmacht.

The second time they were heartlessly betrayed by the Mother- land was when she abandoned them
to die in captivity.

And the third time they were unscrupulously betrayed was when, with motherly love, she coaxed
them to return home, with such phrases as "The Motherland has forgiven you! The Mother- land
calls you!" and snared them the moment they reached the frontiers.

[One of the biggest war criminals. Colonel General Golikov, former chief of the Red Army's
intelligence administration, was put in charge of coaxing the repatriates home and swallowing them
up.]

It would appear that during the one thousand one hundred years of Russia's existence as a state there
have been, ah, how many foul and terrible deeds! But among them was there ever so multimillioned
foul a deed as this: to betray one's own soldiers and proclaim them traitors?

How easily we left them out of our own accounting! He was a traitor? For shame! Write him off!
And our Father wrote them off, even before we did: he threw the flower of Moscow's in- telligentsia
into the Vyazma meat grinder with Berdan single- loading rifles, vintage 1866, and only one for
every five men at that. What Lev Tolstoi is going to describe that Borodino for us? And with one
stupid slither of his greasy, stubby finger, the Great Strategist sent 120,000 of our young men, almost
as many as all the Russian forces at Borodino, across the Strait of Kerch in December, 1941 —
senselessly, and exclusively for the sake of a sensational New Year's communique — and he turned
them all over to the Germans without a fight.

And yet, for some reason, it was not he who was the traitor, but they.

(How easily we let ourselves be taken in by partisan labels; how easily we agreed to regard these
devoted men as — traitors! In one of the Butyrki cells that spring, there was an old man, Lebedev, a
metallurgist, a professor in rank, and in appearance a stalwart artisan of the last century or maybe
even the century before, from, say, the famous Demidov iron foundries. He was broad of shoulder,
broad of head, wore a Pugachev-like beard, and the wide span of his hand could lift a 150-pound
bucket. In the cell he wore a faded gray laborer's smock over his under- wear; he was slovenly and
might have been an auxiliary prison worker — until he sat down to read, and then his habitual
powerful intelligence lit up his face. The men often gathered around him. He discussed metallurgy



very little, but explained to us in his kettledrum bass voice that Stalin was exactly the same kind of
dog as Ivan the Terrible: "Shoot!" "Strangle!" "Don't hesitate!" He explained to us also that Maxim
Gorky had been a slobbering prattler, an apologist for executioners. I was very much taken with this
Lebedev. It was as though the whole Russian people were embodied, there before my eyes, in that
one thick- set torso with that intelligent head and the arms and legs of a plowman. He had already
thought through so much! I learned from him to understand the world! And suddenly, with a
chopping gesture of his huge hand, he thundered out that those charged under Article 58- lb were
traitors of the Motherland and must not be forgiven. And those very same Ib's were piled up on the
board bunks all around. And how hurtful to them this was! The old man was pontificating with such
conviction in the name of Rus- sia's peasantry and labor that they were abashed and found it hard to
defend themselves against the attack from this new direction. I was the one to whom it fell, along
with two boys charged under 58-10, to defend them and to argue with the old man. But what depths
of enforced ignorance were achieved by the monstrous lies of the state. Even the most broad-minded
of us can embrace only that part of the truth into which our own snout has blun- dered,)

[Vitkovsky writes about this, on the basis of the thirties, in more general terms. It was astonishing

that the pseudo wreckers, who knew perfectly well that they weren't wreckers, believed that military
men and priests were being shaken up justifiably. The military men, who knew they hadn't worked
for foreign intelligence services and had not sabotaged the Red Army, beUeved readily enough that
the engineers were wreckers and that the priests deserved to be destroyed. Imprisoned, the Soviet
person reasoned in the following way: I personally am innocent, but any methods are justified in
dealing with those others, the enemies. The lessons of interrogation and the cell failed to enlighten
such people. Even after they themselves had been convicted, they retained the blind beliefs of their
days in freedom: belief in universal conspiracies, poi- sonings, wrecking, espionage.]

How many wars Russia has been involved in! (It would have been better if there had been fewer.)
And were there many traitors in all those wars? Had anyone observed that treason had become
deeply rooted in the hearts of Russian soldiers? Then, under the most just social system in the world,
came the most just war of all — and out of nowhere millions of traitors appeared, from among the
simplest, lowliest elements of the population. How is this to be understood and explained?

Capitalist England fought at our side against Hitler; Marx had eloquently described the poverty and
suffering of the work- ing class in that same England. Why was it that in this war only one traitor
could be found among them, the businessman "Lord Haw Haw" — but in our country millions?

It is frightening to open one's trap about this, but might the heart of the matter not be in the political
system?

One of our most ancient proverbs justifies the war prisoner: "The captive will cry out, but the dead
man never." During the reign of Tsar Aleksei Mikhailovich, nobility was granted for durance in
captivity! And in all subsequent wars it was considered society's duty to exchange prisoners, to
comfort one's own and to give them sustenance and aid. Every escape from captivity was glorified as
the height of heroism. Throughout World War I, money was collected in Russia to aid our prisoners
of war, and our nurses were permitted to go to Germany to help our prisoners, and our newspapers
reminded their readers daily that our pris- oners of war, our compatriots, were languishing in evil
captivity.

All the Western peoples behaved the same in our war: parcels, letters, all kinds of assistance flowed
freely through the neutral countries. The Western POW's did not have to lower themselves to accept
ladlefuls from German soup kettles. They talked back to the German guards. Western governments
gave their captured soldiers their seniority rights, their regular promotions, even their pay.

The only soldier in the world who cannot surrender is the soldier of the world's one and only Red
Army. That's what it says in our military statutes. (The Germans would shout at us from their



trenches: "Ivan plen nicht!" — "Ivan no prisoner!") Who can picture all that means? There is war;
there is death — but there is no surrender! What a discovery! What it means is: Go and die; we will
go on living. And if you lose your legs, yet man- age to return from captivity on crutches, we will
convict you. (The Leningrader Ivanov, commander of a machine-gun platoon in the Finnish War,
was subsequently thus imprisoned in Ustvym- lag, for example. )

Our soldiers alone, renounced by their Motherland and de- graded to nothing in the eyes of enemies
and allies, had to push their way to the swine swill being doled out in the backyards of the Third
Reich. Our soldiers alone had the doors shut tight to keep them from returning to their homes,
although their young souls tried hard not to believe this. There was something called Article 58-lb —
and, in wartime, it provided only for execution by shooting! For not wanting to die from a German
bullet, the prisoner had to die from a Soviet bullet for having been a prisoner of war! Some get theirs
from the enemy; we get it from our own!

Incidentally, it is very naive to say What for? At no time have governments been moralists. They
never imprisoned people and executed them /or having done something. They imprisoned and
executed them to keep them from doing something. They im- prisoned all those POWs, of course,
not /or treason to the Mother- land, because it was absolutely clear even to a fool that only the
Vlasov men could be accused of treason. They imprisoned all of them to keep them from telling their
fellow villagers about Europe. What the eye doesn't see, the heart doesn't grieve for.

What, then, were the courses of action open to Russian war prisoners? There was only one legally
acceptable course: to lie down and let oneself be trampled to death. Every blade of grass pushes its
fragile length upward in order to live. As for you — lie down and be trampled on. Even though
you've been slow about it, even though you couldn't do it on the battlefield, at least die now; then
you will not be prosecuted.

The soldiers sleep. They spoke their word
And they are right for eternity.

And every other path which, in desperation, your mind may invent is going to lead you into conflict
with the Law.

Escape and return to the Motherland — past the guards ring- ing the camp, across half Germany, then
through Poland or the Balkans — led straight to SMERSH and prison. They were asked: How did you
manage to escape when others couldn't? This stinks! Come on, you rat, what assignment did they
give you? (Mikhail Bumatsev, Pavel Bondarenko, and many, many others.)

[It has become the accepted thing for our literary critics to say that Shol- okhov, in his immortal
story "Sudba Cheloveka" — "The Fate of a Man" — spoke the "bitter truth" about "this side of our
life" and that he "revealed" the problem. But we must retort that in this story, which is in general
very inferior, and in which the passages about the war are pale and unconvincing — since the author
evidently knew nothing about the last war — and the descriptions of Germans are unconvincing
cartoon cliches (only the hero's wife is successfully portrayed — because she is a pure Christian
straight out of Dostoyevsky), in this story about a war prisoner, the real problem of the war
prisoners was hidden or distorted:

(1) The author picked the least incriminating form of being taken prisoner conceivable — the soldier

was captured while unconscious, so as to make him noncontroversial and to bypass the whole
poignancy of the problem. (What if he had been conscious when he was taken prisoner, as was most
often the case? What would have happened to him then?)

(2) The fact that the Motherland had deserted us, had renounced us, had cursed us, was not presented
as the war prisoner's chief problem. Sholokhov says not a word about it. But it was because of that



particular factor that there was no way out. On the contrary, he identifies the presence of traitors
among us as constituting the problem. (But if this really was the main thing, one might then expect
him to have investigated further and explained where they came from a full quarter-century after a
Revolution that was supported by the entire people!)

(3) Sholokhov dreamed up a fantastic, spy-story escape from captivity, stretching innumerable points
to avoid the obligatory, inevitable procedural step of the returned war prisoner's reception in
SMERSH — the Identification and Screening Camp. Not only was Sokolov, the hero, not put behind
barbed wire, as provided in the regulations, but — and this is a real joke — he was given a month's
holiday by his colonel! (In other words: the freedom to carry out the assignment given him by the
Fascist intelligence service. So his colonel would end up in the same place as he!)]

Escaping to the Western partisans, to the Resistance forces, only postponed your full reckoning with
the military tribunal; also, it made you still more dangerous. You could have acquired a very harmful
spirit through living freely among Europeans. And if you had not been afraid to escape and continue
to fight, it meant you were a determined person and thus doubly dangerous in the Motherland.

Did you survive POW camp at the expense of your com- patriots and comrades? Did you become a
member of the camp Polizei, or a commandant, a helper of the Germans and of death? Stalinist law
did not punish you any more severely than if you had operated with the Resistance forces. It was the
same article of the Code and the same term — and one could guess why too. Such a person was less
dangerous. But the inert law that is in- explicably implanted in us forbade this path to all except the
dregs.

In addition to those four possibilities — either impossible or un- acceptable — there was a fifth: to wait
for German recruiters, to see what they would summon you to.

Sometimes, fortunately, representatives came from German rural districts to select hired men for
their farmers. Sometimes they came from corporations and picked out engineers and mechanics.
According to the supreme Stalinist imperative you should have rejected that too. You should have
concealed the fact that you were an engineer. You should have concealed the fact that you were a
skilled worker. As an industrial designer or electrician, you could have preserved your patriotic
purity only if you had stayed in the POW camp to dig in the earth, to rot, to pick through the garbage
heap. In that case, for pure treason to the Motherland, you could count on getting, your head raised
high in pride, ten years in prison and five more "muzzled." Whereas for treason to the Motherland
aggravated by working for the enemy, especially in one's own profession, you got, with bowed head,
the same ten years in prison and five more muzzled.

And that was the jeweler's precision of a behemoth — Stalin's trademark.

Now and then recruiters turned up who were of quite a dif- ferent stripe — Russians, usually recent
Communist political com- missars. White Guards didn't accept that type of employment. These
recruiters scheduled a meeting in the camp, condemned the Soviet regime, and appealed to prisoners
to enlist in spy schools or in Vlasov units.

People who have never starved as our war prisoners did, who have never gnawed on bats that
happened to fly into the barracks, who have never had to boil the soles of old shoes, will never
understand the irresistible material force exerted by any kind of appeal, any kind of argument
whatever, if behind it, on the other side of the camp gates, smoke rises from a field kitchen, and if
everyone who signs up is fed a bellyful of kasha right then and there — if only once! Just once more
before I die!

And hovering over the steaming kasha and the inducements of the recruiter was the apparition of
freedom and a real life — wherever it might call! To the Vlasov battalions. To the Cossack regiments



of Krasnov. To the labor battalions — pouring cement in the future Atlantic Wall. To the fjords of
Norway. To the sands of Libya. To the "Hiwi" units ("Hilfswillige" — volunteers in the German
Wehrmacht — there being twelve "Hiwi" men in each German company). And then, finally, to the
village Polizei, who pursued and caught partisans — many of whom the Mother- land would also
renounce. Wherever it might call, any place at all, at least anything so as not to stay there and die
like abandoned cattle.

We ourselves released from every obligation, not merely to his Motherland but to all humanity, the
human being whom we drove to gnawing on bats.

And those of our boys who agreed to become half-baked spies still had not drawn any drastic
conclusions from their abandoned state; they were still, in fact, acting very patriotically. They saw
this course as the least difficult means of getting out of POW camp. Almost to a man, they decided
that as soon as the Germans sent them across to the Soviet side, they would turn themselves in to the
authorities, turn in their equipment and instructions, and join their own benign command in laughing
at the stupid Germans. They would then put on their Red Army uniforms and return to fight bravely
in their units. And tell me, who, speaking in human terms, could have expected anything else? How
could it have been any other way? These were straightforward, sincere men. I saw many of them.
They had honest round faces and spoke with an attractive Vyatka or Vladimir accent. They boldly
joined up as spies, even though they'd had only four or five grades of rural school and were not even
competent to cope with map and compass.

It appears that they picked the only way out they could. And one would suppose that the whole thing
was an expensive and stupid game on the part of the German Command. But no! Hitler played in
rhythm and in tune with his brother dictator! Spy mania was one of the fundamental aspects of
Stalin's insanity. It seemed to Stalin that the country was swarming with spies. All the Chinese who
Uved in the Soviet Far East were convicted as spies — Article 58-6 — and were taken to the northern
camps, where they perished. The same fate had awaited Chinese participants in the Soviet civil
war — if they hadn't cleared out in time. Several hundred thousand Koreans were exiled to
Kazakhstan, all similarly ac- cused of spying. All Soviet citizens who at one time or another had
Uved abroad, who at one time or another had hung around Intourist hotels, who at one time or
another happened to be photographed next to a foreigner, or who had themselves photo- graphed a
city building (the Golden Gate in Vladimir) were accused of the same crime. Those who stared too
long at railroad tracks, at a highway bridge, at a factory chimney were similarly charged. All the
numerous foreign Communists stranded in the Soviet Union, all the big and little Comintern officials
and em- ployees, one after another, without any individual distinctions, were charged first of all with
espionage.

[ losip Tito just barely escaped this fate. And Popov and Tanev, fellow defendants of Dimitrov in the
Leipzig trial, both got prison terms. (For Dimi- trov himself Stalin prepared another fate.)]

And the Latvian Rifle- men — whose bayonets were the most reliable in the first years of the
Revolution — were also accused of espionage when they were arrested to a man in 1937. Stalin seems
somehow to have twisted around and maximized the famous declaration of that coquette Catherine
the Great: he would rather that 999 innocent men should rot than miss one genuine spy. Given all
this, how could one believe and trust Russian soldiers who had really been in the hands of the
German intelligence service? And how it eased the burden for the MGB executioners when
thousands of soldiers pouring in from Europe did not even try to conceal that they had voluntarily
enlisted as spies. What an astonishing con- firmation of the predictions of the Wisest of the Wise!
Come on, keep coming, you silly fools! The article and the retribution have long since been waiting
for you!

But it is appropriate to ask one thing more. There still were prisoners of war who did not accept
recruiting offers, who never worked for the Germans at their profession or trade, and who were not



camp police, who spent the whole war in POW camps, without sticking their noses outside, and who,
in spite of every- thing, did not die, however unlikely this was. For example, they made cigarette
lighters out of scrap metal, like the electrical engineers Nikolai Andreyevich Semyonov and Fyodor
Fyodoro- vich Karpov, and in that way managed to get enough to eat. And did the Motherland
forgive them for surrendering?

No, it did not forgive them! I met both Semyonov and Karpov in the Butyrki after they had already
received their lawful sen- tence. And what was it? The alert reader already knows: ten years of
imprisonment and five muzzled. As brilliant engineers, they had rejected German offers to work at
their profession. In 1941 Junior Lieutenant Semyonov had gone to the front as a volunteer. In 1942
he still didn't have a revolver; instead, he had an empty holster — and the interrogator could not
understand why he hadn't shot himself with his holster! He had escaped from captivity three times.
And in 1945, after he had been Uberated from a concentration camp, seated atop a tank as a member
of a penalty unit of tank-borne infantry, he took part in the capture of Berlin and received the Order
of the Red Star. Yet, after all that, he was finally imprisoned and sentenced. All of this mirrored our
Nemesis.

Very few of the war prisoners returned across the Soviet border as free men, and if one happened to
get through by accident be- cause of the prevailing chaos, he was seized later on, even as late as
1946 or 1947. Some were arrested at assembly points in Ger- many. Others weren't arrested openly
right away but were trans- ported from the border in freight cars, under convoy, to one of the
numerous Identification and Screening Camps (PFL's) scat- tered throughout the country. These
camps differed in no way from the common run of Corrective Labor Camps (ITL's) ex- cept that
their prisoners had not yet been sentenced but would be sentenced there. All these PFL's were also
attached to some kind of factory, or mine, or construction project, and the former POW's, looking
out on the Motherland newly restored to them through the same barbed wire through which they had
seen Germany, could begin work from their first day on a ten-hour work day. Those under suspicion
were questioned during their rest periods, in the evenings, and at night, and there were large numbers
of Security officers and interrogators in the PFL's for this purpose. As always, the interrogation
began with the hypothesis that you were obviously guilty. And you, without going outside the barbed
wire, had to prove that you were not guilty. Your only available means to this end was to rely on
witnesses who were exactly the same kind of POW's as you.

Obviously they might not have turned up in your own PFL; they might, in fact, be at the other end of
the country; in that case, the Security officers of, say, Kemerovo would send off inquiries to the
Security officers of Solikamsk, who would question the wit- nesses and send back their answers
along with new inquiries, and you yourself would be questioned as a witness in some other case.
True, it might take a year or two before your fate was resolved, but after all, the Motherland was
losing nothing in the process. You were out mining coal every day. And if one of your witnesses
gave the wrong sort of testimony about you, or if none of your witnesses was alive, you had only
yourself to blame, and you were sure to be entered in the documents as a traitor o/the Motherland.
And the visiting military court would rubber- stamp your tenner. And if, despite all their twisting
things about, it appeared that you really hadn't worked for the Germans, and if — and this was the
main point — you had not had the chance to see the Americans and English with your own eyes (to
have been liberated from captivity by them instead of by us was a gravely aggravating circumstance),
then the Security officers would decide the degree of isolation in which you were to be held. Certain
people were ordered to change their place of resi- dence — which always breaks a person's ties with
his environment and makes him more vulnerable. Others were valiantly offered the chance to go to
work in the VOKhR, the Militarized Guard Service. In that situation, while nominally remaining
free, a man lost all his personal freedom and was sent off to some isolated area. There was a third
category: after a handshake, some were humanely permitted to return home, although, even without
aggravating circumstances, they deserved to be shot for having surrendered. But people in this
category celebrated prematurely! Even before the former prisoner arrived home, his case had
reached his home district through the secret channels of State Security. These people remained



eternally outsiders. And with the first mass arrests, like those of 1948-1949, they were im- mediately
arrested for hostile propaganda or some other reason. I was imprisoned with people in that category
too.

"Oh, if I had only known!" That was the refrain in the prison cells that spring. If I had only known
that this was how I would be greeted! That they would deceive me so! That this would be my fate!
Would I have really returned to my Motherland? Not for anything! I would have made my way to
Switzerland, to France! I would have gone across the sea, across the ocean! Across three oceans!

[In actual fact, even when POW's actually knew what would happen to them, they behaved in exactly
the same way. Vasily Aleksandrov was taken prisoner in Finland. He was sought out there by some
elderly Petersburg merchant who asked him his name and patronymic and then said: "In 19171 owed
your grandfather a large debt, and I didn't have the chance to pay it. Here you are — take it!" An old
debt is a windfall! After the war Aleksandrov was accepted by the circle of Russian emigres, and he
got engaged to a girl there whom he came to love — and not just casually. To educate him, his future
father-in-law gave him a bound set of Pravda — just as it was issued from 1918 to 1941, without any
deletions or corrections. At the same time, he recounted to him more or less completely the history
of the waves of arrests, as we have set it forth in Chapter 2, above. And nevertheless . . . Aleksandrov
abandoned his fiancee, and his wealth, and returned to the U.S.S.R., where he was given, as one can
easily guess, ten years and disenfranchisement for five more. In 1953 he was happy to have managed
to snag himself a job as foreman in a Special Camp.]

But the more thoughtful prisoners corrected them. They had made their mistake earlier! They were
stupid to have dashed off to the front lines in 1941. It takes a fool to rush off to war! Right from the
start, they should have gotten themselves set up in the rear. Somewhere quiet. Those who did are
heroes now. And it would have been an even surer thing just to desert. Almost cer- tainly, one's skin
would be whole. They didn't get ten years either — but eight, or seven. And they weren't excluded
from any of the cushy jobs in camp. After all, a deserter was not regarded as an enemy or a traitor or
a political prisoner. He was con- sidered not a hostile factor but a friendly one, a nonpolitical
ofi'ender, so to speak. That point of view aroused passionate argument and objections. The deserters
had to spend all those years rotting in prison, and they would not be forgiven. But there would soon
be an amnesty for everyone else; they would all be released. (At that time the principal advantage of
being a deserter was still unknown.)

Those who had gotten in via 58-10, snatched from their apartments or from the Red Army, often
envied the rest. What the hell! For the very same money, in other words for the same ten-year
sentence, they could have seen so many interesting things, like those other fellows, who had been
just about every- where! And here we are, about to croak in camp, without ever having seen anything
beyond our own stinking stairs. Inciden- tally, those who were in on Article 58-10 could hardly
conceal their triumphant presentiment that they would be the first to be amnestied.

The only ones who did not sigh: "Oh, if I had only known" — because they knew very well what they
were doing — and the only ones who did not expect any mercy and did not expect an amnesty — were
the Vlasov men.

I had known about them and been perplexed about them long before our unexpected meeting on the
board bunks of prison.

First there had been the leaflets, repeatedly soaked through, dried out, and lost in the high grass —
uncut for the third year — of the front-line strip near Orel. In December, 1942, they had announced
the creation in Smolensk of a "Russian Committee" — which apparently claimed to be some sort of
Russian govern- ment and yet at the same time seemed not to be one. Evidently the Germans
themselves had not yet made up their minds. For that reason, the communique seemed to be a hoax.
There was a photograph of General Vlasov in the leaflets, and his biography was outlined. In the



fuzzy photograph, his face looked well fed and successful, like all our generals of the new stripe.
They told me later that this wasn't so, that Vlasov's face was more like that of a Western general —
high, thin, with horn-rimmed glasses. His biography testified to a penchant for success. He had
begun in a peasant family, and 1937 had not broken his skyrocketing career; nor was it ruined by his
service as a military adviser to Chiang Kai-shek. The first and only disaster of his earlier life had
occurred when his Second Shock Army, after being en- circled, was ineptly abandoned to die of
starvation. But how much of that whole biography could be believed?

[As far as one can establish at this late date, Andrei Andreyevich Vlasov, prevented by the
Revolution from completing his studies at the Nizhni Nov- gorod Orthodox Seminary, was drafted
into the Red Army in 1919 and fought as an enlisted man. On the southern front, against Denikin and
Wrangel, he rose to be commander of a platoon, then of a company. In the twenties he completed the
Vystrel courses. He became a member of the Communist Party in 1930. In 1936, having attained the
rank of regimental commander, he was sent to China as a military adviser. Evidently he had no ties
to the top military and Party circles, and he therefore turned up naturally in that Stalinist "second
echelon" of officers promoted to replace the purged commanders of armies, divisions, and brigades.
From 1938 on he commanded a division. And in 1940, when "new" (in other words, old) officer
ranks were created, he became a major general. From additional information one can conclude that
in that corps of newly made generals, many of whom were totally stupid and inexperi- enced, Vlasov
was one of the most talented. His 99th Infantry Division, which he had instructed and trained from
the summer of 1940 on, was not caught off balance by the German attack. On the contrary, while the
rest of the army reeled backward, his division advanced, retook Przemysl, and held it for six days.
Quickly skipping the rank of corps commander, in 1941 Lieutenant Gen- eral Vlasov was in
command of the Thirty -seventh Army near Kiev. He made his way out of the enormous Kiev
encirclement and in December, 1941, near Moscow he commanded the Twentieth Army, whose
successful Soviet counter- offensive for defense of the capital (the taking of Solnechnogorsk) was
noted in the Sovinformburo communique for December 12. And the list of generals mentioned there
was as follows: Zhukov, Lelyushenko, Kuznetsov, Vlasov, Rokossovsky, Govorov. Thanks to the
speed with which officers were promoted in those months, he became Deputy Commander of the
Volkhov Front (under Meretskov), and took over command of the Second Shock Army. On January
7, 1942, at the head of that army, he began a drive to break the Leningrad blockade — an attack
across the Volkhov River to the northwest. This had been planned as a combined operation, a
concerted push from several direc- tions and from Leningrad itself. At scheduled intervals the Fifty-
fourth, the Fourth, and the Fifty-second armies were to take part in it also. But those three armies
either did not advance because they were unready or else came to a quick halt. At that time we still
didn't have the capacity to plan such complex combined operations, and, more importantly, provide
supplies for them. Vlasov's Second Shock Army, however, was successful in its assault, and by
February, 1942, it was 46 miles deep inside the German lines ! And from then on, the reckless
Stalinist Supreme Command could find neither men nor ammunition to reinforce even those troops.
(That's the kind of reserves they had begun the offensive with!) Leningrad, too, was left to die
behind the blockade, having received no specific information from Novgorod. During March the
winter roads still held up. From April on, however, the entire swampy area through which the
Second Army had advanced melted into mud, and there were no supply roads, and there was no help
from the air. The army was without food and, at the same time, Vlasov was refused permission to re-
treat. For two months they endured starvation and extermination. In the Butyrki, soldiers from that
army told me how they had cut off the hoofs of dead and rotting horses and boiled the scrapings and
eaten them. Then, on May 14, a German attack was launched from all sides against the encircled
army. The only planes in the air, of course, were German. And only then, in mockery, were they
given permission to pull back behind the Volkhov. They made several hopeless attempts to break
through — until the beginning of July.

And so it was that Vlasov's Second Shock Army perished, literally recapitu- lating the fate of
Samsonov's Russian Second Army in World War I, having been just as insanely thrown into
encirclement.



Now this, of course, was treason to the Motherland! This, of course, was vicious, self-obsessed
betrayal! But it was Stalin's. Treason does not necessarily involve selling out for money. It can
include ignorance and carelessness in the preparations for war, confusion and cowardice at its very
start, the meaningless sacrifice of armies and corps solely for the sake of saving one's own marshal's
uniform. Indeed, what more bitter treason is there on the part of a Supreme Commander in Chief?

Unlike Samsonov, Vlasov did not commit suicide. After his army had been wiped out, he wandered
among the woods and swamps and, on July 6, per- sonally surrendered in the area of Siverskaya. He
was taken to the German headquarters near Lotzen in East Prussia, where they were holding several
captured generals and a brigade political commissar, G. N. Zhilenkov, formerly a successful Party
official and secretary of one of the Moscow District Party Committees. These captives had already
confessed their disagreement with the policy of the Stalin government. But they had no real leader.
Vlasov became it.]

From his photograph, it was impossible to believe that he was an outstanding man or that for long
years he had suffered pro- foundly for Russia. As for the leaflets reporting the creation of the ROA,
the "Russian Liberation Army," not only were they written in bad Russian, but they were imbued
with an alien spirit that was clearly German and, moreover, seemed little con- cerned with their
presumed subject; besides, and on the other hand, they contained crude boasting about the plentiful
chow available and the cheery mood of the soldiers. Somehow one couldn't believe in that army,
and, if it really did exist, what kind of cheery mood could it be in? Only a German could lie like that.

[In reality there was no Russian Liberation Army until almost the very end of the war. Both the name
and the insignia devised for it were invented by a German of Russian origin. Captain Strik-Strikfeldt,
in the Ost-Propaganda- Abteilung. Although he held only a minor position, he had influence, and he
tried to convince the Hitlerite leadership that a German-Russian alliance was essential and that the
Russians should be encouraged to collaborate with Ger- nany. A vain undertaking for both sides!
Each side wanted only to use and leceive the other. But, in the given situation, the Germans had
power — they were on top of the setup. And the Vlasov officers had only their fantasy — at the bottom
of the abyss. There was no such army, but anti-Soviet formations made up of Soviet citizens were
organized from the very start of the war. The irst to support the Germans were the Lithuanians. In the
one year we had been there we had aroused their deep, angry hostility! And then the SS-Galicia
Division was created from Ukrainian volunteers. And Estonian units afterward. In the fall of 1941,
guard companies appeared in Byelorussia. And a Tatar battalion in the Crimea. We ourselves had
sowed the seeds of all this!

Take, for example, our stupid twenty-year policy of closing and destroying the Moslem mosques in
the Crimea. And compare that with the policy of the farsighted conqueror Catherine the Great, who
contributed state funds for building and expanding the Crimean mosques. And the Hitlerites, when
they arrived, were smart enough to present themselves as their defenders. Later, Caucasian
detachments and Cossack armies — more than a cavalry corps — put in an appearance on the German
side. In the first winter of the war, platoons and companies of Russian volunteers began to be
formed. But the German Command was very distrustful of these Russian units, and their master ser-
geants and lieutenants were Germans. Only their noncoms below master ser- geant were Russian.
They also used such German commands as "Achtung!," "Halt!" etc. More significant and entirely
Russian were the following units: a brigade in Lokot, in Bryansk Province, from November, 1941,
when a local teacher of engineering, K. P. Voskoboinikov, proclaimed the "National Labor Party of
Russia" and issued a manifesto to the citizens of the nation, hoisting the flag of St. George; a unit in
the Osintorf settlement near Orsha, formed at the beginning of 1942 under the leadership of Russian
emigres (it must be said that only a small group of Russian emigres joined this movement, and even
they did not conceal their anti-German feelings and allowed many cross- overs [including a whole
battalion] to the Soviet side . . . after which they were dropped by the Germans); and a unit formed
by Gil, in the summer of 1942, near Lublin. (V. V. Gil, a Communist Party member and even, it
seems, a Jew, not only survived as a POW but, with the help of other POW's, became the head of a



camp near Suwalki and offered to create a "fighting alliance of Russian nationalists" for the
Germans.) However, there was as yet no Russian Liberation Army in all of this and no Vlasov. The
companies under German command were put on the Russian front, as an experiment, and the
Russian units were sent against the Bryansk, Orsha, and Polish partisans.]

We soon discovered that there really were Russians fighting against us and that they fought harder
than any SS men. In July, 1943, for example, near Orel, a platoon of Russians in German uniform
defended Sobakinskiye Vyselki. They fought with the desperation that might have been expected if
they had built the place themselves. One of them was driven into a root cellar. They threw hand
grenades in after him and he fell silent. But they had no more than stuck their heads in than he let
them have another volley from his automatic pistol. Only when they lobbed in an antitank grenade
did they find out that, within the root cellar, he had another foxhole in which he had taken shelter
from the infantry grenades. Just try to imagine the degree of shock, deafness, and hopelessness in
which he had kept on fighting.

They defended, for example, the unshakable Dnieper bridge- head south of Tursk. For two weeks we

continued to fight there for a mere few hundred yards. The battles were fierce in Decem- ber, 1943,
and so was the cold. Through many long days both we and they went through the extreme trials of
winter, fighting in winter camouflage cloaks that covered our overcoats and caps. Near Malye
Kozlovichi, I was told, an interesting encounter took place. As the soldiers dashed back and forth
among the pines, things got confused, and two soldiers lay down next to one another. No longer very
accurately oriented, they kept shooting at someone, somewhere over there. Both had Soviet
automatic pistols. They shared their cartridges, praised one another, and together swore at the grease
freezing on their automatic pistols. Finally, their pistols stopped firing altogether, and they decided
to take a break and light up. They pulled back their white hoods — and at the same instant each saw
the other's cap ... the eagle and the star. They jumped up! Their automatic pistols still refused to fire!
Grabbing them by the barrel and swinging them like clubs, they began to go at each other. This, if
you will, was not politics and not the Motherland, but just sheer caveman distrust: If I take pity on
him, he is going to kill me.

In East Prussia, a trio of captured Vlasov men was being marched along the roadside a few steps
away from me. At that moment a T-34 tank thundered down the highway. Suddenly one of the
captives twisted around and dived underneath the tank. The tank veered, but the edge of its track
crushed him neverthe- less. The broken man lay writhing, bloody foam coming from his mouth. And
one could certainly understand him! He pre- ferred a soldier's death to being hanged in a dungeon.

They had no choice. There was no other way for them to fight. They had no chance to find a way
out, to safeguard their lives, by some more cautious mode of fighting. If "pure" surrender was
considered unforgivable treason to the Motherland, then what about those who had taken up enemy
arms? Our propaganda, in all its crudity, explained their conduct as: (1) treason (was it biologically
based? carried in the bloodstream?) ; or (2) coward- ice — which it certainly was not! A coward tries
to find a spot where things are easy, soft, safe. And men could be induced to enter the Wehrmacht's
Vlasov detachments only in the last ex- tremity, only at the limit of desperation, only out of
inexhaustible hatred of the Soviet regime, only with total contempt for their own safety. For they
knew they would never have the faintest glimpse of mercy! When we captured them, we shot them
as soon as the first intelligible Russian word came from their mouths. In Russian captivity, as in
German captivity, the worst lot of all was reserved for the Russians.

In general, this war revealed to us that the worst thing in the world was to be a Russian.

I recall with shame an incident I observed during the liquida- tion — in other words, the plundering —
of the Bobruisk encircle- ment, when I was walking along the highway among wrecked and
overturned German automobiles, and a wealth of booty lay scattered everywhere. German cart
horses wandered aimlessly in and out of a shallow depression where wagons and automo- biles that



had gotten stuck were buried in the mud, and bonfires of booty were smoking away. Then I heard a
cry for help: "Mr. Captain! Mr. Captain!" A prisoner on foot in German britches was crying out to
me in pure Russian. He was naked from the waist up, and his face, chest, shoulders, and back were
all bloody, while a sergeant osobist, a Security man, seated on a horse, drove him forward with a
whip, pushing him with his horse. He kept lashing that naked back up and down with the whip,
without letting him turn around, without letting him ask for help. He drove him along, beating and
beating him, raising new crimson welts on his skin.

And this was not one of the Punic Wars, nor a war between the Greeks and the Persians! Any officer,
possessing any author- ity, in any army on earth ought to have stopped that senseless torture. In any
army on earth, yes, but in ours? Given our fierce and uncompromising method of dividing mankind?
(If you are not with us, if you are not our own, etc., then you deserve nothing but contempt and
annihilation.) So I was afraid to defend the Vlasov man against the osobist. / said nothing and I did
nothing. I passed him by as if I could not hear him ... so that I myself would not be infected by that
universally recognized plague. (What if the Vlasov man was indeed some kind of supervillain? Or
maybe the osobist would think something was wrong with me? And then?) Or, putting it more
simply for anyone who knows anything about the situation in the Soviet Army at that time: would
that osobist have paid any attention to an army captain?

So the osobist continued to lash the defenseless man brutally and drive him along like a beast.

This picture will remain etched in my mind forever. This, after all, is almost a symbol of the
Archipelago. It ought to be on the jacket of this book.

The Vlasov men had a presentiment of all this; they knew it ahead of time; nevertheless, on the left
sleeve of their German uniforms they sewed the shield with the white-blue -red edging, the field of
St. Andrew, and the letters "ROA."

[These letters became even better known, although, as before, there was still no real Russian
Liberation Army. The units were all scattered and kept subordinate to German orders, and the
Vlasov generals had nothing to do but play cards in Dahlemdorf, near Berlin. By the middle of 1942,
Voskoboinikov's brigade, which, after his death, was commanded by Kaminsky, numbered five
infantry regiments of 2,500 to 3,000 men each, with attached artillery crews, a tank battalion
consisting of two dozen Soviet tanks, and an artillery battalion with three dozen guns. The
commanding officers were POW officers, and the rank and file was made up, in considerable part, of
local Bryansk volunteers. This brigade was under orders to guard the area against partisans. In the
sum- mer of 1942, the brigade of Gil-Blazhevich was transferred for the same purpose from Poland,
where it had been notable for its cruelty toward Poles and Jews, to the area near Mogilev. At the
beginning of 1943, its command refused to acknowledge Vlasov's authority, demanding that he
explain why, in his stated program, there was no reference to the "struggle against world Jewry and
Jew-loving commissars." These were the very men — called the Rodionovites, because Gil had
changed his name to Rodionov — who in August, 1943, when Hitler's approaching defeat became
apparent, changed their black flag with a silver skull to a red flag, and proclaimed Soviet authority
and a large "partisan region" in the northeast comer of Byelorussia.

At that time, Soviet newspapers began to write about the "partisan region," but without explaining its
origins. Later on, all surviving Rodionovites were imprisoned. And whom did the Germans
immediately throw in against the Rodionovites? The Kaminsky brigade! That was in May, 1944, and
they also threw in thirteen of their own divisions in an effort to liquidate the "partisan region." That
was the extent to which Germans understood all those tricolor cockades, St. George, and the field of
St. Andrew. The Russian and German languages were mutually untranslatable, inexpressible,
uncorrelatable. Still worse: in October, 1944, the Germans threw in Kaminsky's brigade — with its
Moslem units — to suppress the Warsaw uprising. While one group of Russians sat traitorously
dozing beyond the Vistula, watching the death of Warsaw through their binoculars, other Russians



crushed the uprising! Hadn't the Poles had enough Russian villainy to bear in the nineteenth century
with- out having to endure more of it in the twentieth? For that matter, was that the last of it?
Perhaps more is still to come. The career of the Osintorf Battalion was apparently more
straightforward. This consisted of about six hundred soldiers and two hundred officers, with an
emigre command, I. K. Sakharov and Lamsdorf, Russian uniforms, and a white -blue-red flag; it was
thrown in near Pskov. Then, reinforced to regimental strength, it was readied for a para- chute drop
on the line of Vologda- Archangel, the idea being to make use of the nest of concentration camps in
that area. Throughout 1943, Igor Sakharov managed to prevent his unit from being sent against the
partisans. But then he was replaced and the battalion was first disarmed and imprisoned in a camp
and then sent off to the Western Front. Then, in the fall of 1943, the Germans decided to send the
Russian cannon fodder to the Atlantic Wall, and against the French and ItaUan Resistance, having
lost, forgotten, and not even tried to recall its original purpose. Those among the Vlasov men who
had managed to retain some kind of political rationality or hope thereupon lost both.]

The inhabitants of the occupied areas held them in contempt as German hire- lings. So did the
Germans, because of their Russian blood. Their pitiful little newspapers were worked over with a
German cen- sor's broadsword: Greater Germany and the Fiihrer. And the Vlasov men had one way
out of all that — to fight to the death, and, when they were not fighting, to down vodka and more
vodka. Foredoomed — that was their existence during all their years of war and alien lands, and there
was no salvation for them from any direction.

Hitler and those around him, even when they were retreating on every front and were staring their
own destruction in the face, could still not overcome their intense distrust of wholly separate Russian
units; they could not bring themselves to organize divi- sions that were entirely Russian, to allow
even the shadow of a Russia that was not totally subject to them. Only in the crack of the final
debacle, in November, 1944, was a belated theatrical production at last permitted in Prague: the
creation of a "Com- mittee for the Liberation of the Peoples of Russia," combining all the different
national groups, and a manifesto, which, like everything that had preceded it, was neither fish nor
fowl, since the concept of a Russia independent of Germany and Nazism was still not tolerated.
Vlasov became chairman of the commit- tee. And only in the fall of 1944 did they begin to form
Vlasov divisions that were exclusively Russian.

[They were: the 1st, based on "the Kaminsky brigade," under S. K. Bunyachenko; the 2nd, under
Zverev (former military commandant of Khar- kov); half the 3rd; segments of the 4th; and Maltsev's
air force detachment. Only four divisions were authorized.]

Probably the wise Ger- man political leaders had concluded that at this point the Russian workers in
Germany (the "ostovtsy") would rush to take up arms. But the Red Army was already on the Vistula
and the Danube. And ironically, as though to confirm the farsightedness of the very nearsighted
Germans, those Vlasov divisions, in their first and last independent action, dealt a blow — to the
Germans themselves. In the general disaster, Vlasov gathered up his two and a half divisions near
Prague at the end of April, without coordinating his action with the German Supreme Command. It
became known at this point that SS General Steiner was pre- paring to destroy the Czech capital
rather than surrender it in- tact. And Vlasov ordered his divisions to the aid of the Czech rebels. And
at that point, all the hurt, bitterness, and anger against the Germans that had accumulated during
three cruel and futile years in the breasts of the enslaved Russians was vented in the attack on the
Germans. They were shoved out of Prague from an unexpected direction. Did all Czechs realize later
which Russians had saved their city? Our own history is similarly distorted; we claim that Prague
was saved by Soviet armies, although they couldn't have gotten there in time.

Then the Vlasov army began to retreat toward Bavaria and the Americans. They were pinning all

their hopes on the possi- bility of being useful to the Allies; in this way their years of dangling in the
German noose would finally become meaningful. But the Americans greeted them with a wall of
armor and forced them to surrender to Soviet hands, as stipulated by the Yalta Conference. In



Austria that May, Churchill perpetrated the same sort of "act of a loyal ally," but, out of our
accustomed modesty, we did not publicize it. He turned over to the Soviet command the Cossack
corps of 90,000 men.

[This surrender was an act of double-dealing consistent with the spirit of traditional English
diplomacy. The heart of the matter was that the Cossacks were determined to fight to the death, or to
cross the ocean, all the way to Paraguay or Indochina if they had to ... anything rather than surrender
alive. Therefore, the English proposed, first, that the Cossacks give up their arms on the pretext of
replacing them with standardized weapons. Then the officers — without the enlisted men — were
summoned to a supposed conference on the future of the army in the city of Judenburg in the English
occupation zone. But the English had secretly turned the city over to the Soviet armies the night
before. Forty busloads of officers, all the way from commanders of companies on up to General
Krasnov himself, crossed a high viaduct and drove straight down into a semicircle of Black Marias,
next to which stood convoy guards with lists in their hands. The road back was blocked by Soviet
tanks. The officers didn't even have anything with which to shoot themselves or to stab themselves to
death, since their weapons had been taken away. They jumped from the viaduct onto the paving
stones below. Immediately afterward, and just as treacherously, the English turned over the rank-
and-file soldiers by the train- load — pretending that they were on their way to receive new weapons
from their commanders.

In their own countries Roosevelt and Churchill are honored as embodiments of statesmanlike
wisdom. To us, in our Russian prison conversations, their consistent shortsightedness and stupidity
stood out as astonishingly obvious. How could they, in their decline from 1941 to 1945, fail to secure
any guar- antees whatever of the independence of Eastern Europe? How could they give away broad
regions of Saxony and Thuringia in exchange for the preposterous toy of a four- zone Berlin, their
own future Achilles' heel? And what was the military or political sense in their surrendering to
destruction at Stalin's hands hundreds of thousands of armed Soviet citizens determined not to
surrender? They say it was the price they paid for Stalin's agreeing to enter the war against Japan.
With the atom bomb already in their hands, they paid Stalin for not refusing to occupy Manchuria,
for strengthening Mao Tse-tung in China, and for giving Kim II Sung control of half Korea! What
bankruptcy of political thought! And when, subsequently, the Russians pushed out Mikolajczyk,
when Benes and Masaryk came to their ends, when Berlin was blockaded, and Buda- pest flamed
and fell silent, and Korea went up in smoke, and Britain's Con- servatives fled from Suez, could one
really believe that those among them with the most accurate memories did not at least recall that
episode of the Cossacks?]

Along with them, he also handed over many wagonloads of old people, women, and children who
did not want to return to their native Cossack rivers. This great hero, monuments to whom will in
time cover all England, ordered that they, too, be surrendered to their deaths.

In addition to the hurriedly created Vlasov divisions, quite a few Russian subunits went right on
turning sour in the depths of the German Army, wearing standard German uniforms. They finished
out the war on various sectors and in different ways.

I myself fell under Vlasov fire a few days before my arrest. There were Russians in the East Prussian
"sack" which we had surrounded, and one night at the end of January their unit tried to break through
our position to the west, without artillery prepa- ration, in silence. There was no firmly delineated
front in any case, and they penetrated us in depth, catching my sound-locator battery, which was out
in front, in a pincers. I just barely managed to pull it back by the last remaining road. But then I went
back for a piece of damaged equipment, and, before dawn, I watched as they suddenly rose from the
snow where they'd dug in, wearing their winter camouflage cloaks, hurled themselves with a cheer
on the battery of a 152-millimeter gun battalion at Adlig Schwenkitten, and knocked out twelve
heavy cannon with hand grenades before they could fire a shot. Pursued by their tracer bullets, our
last little group ran almost two miles in fresh snow to the bridge across the Passarge River. And there



they were stopped.



Soon after that I was arrested. And now, on the eve of the Victory Parade, here we all were sitting
together on the board bunks of the Butyrki. I took puffs from their cigarettes and they took puffs
from mine. And paired with one or another of them, I used to carry out the six-bucket tin latrine
barrel.

Many of the Vlasov men, like the "spies for hire," were young, bom, say, between 1915 and 1922,
that same "young and unknown tribe" which bustling-bustling Lunacharsky had hurried to greet in
the name of Pushkin. Most of them got into Vlasov military units through that same blind chance
which led their comrades in a neighboring camp to get into the spy thing — it all depended on which
recruiter had gone where.

The recruiters had explained to them jeeringly — or rather, it would have been jeering if it hadn't been
the truth: "Stalin has renounced you! Stalin doesn't give a damn about you!"

Soviet law had outlawed them even before they outlawed themselves.

So they signed up — some of them simply to get out of a death camp, others with the hope of going
over to the partisans. (And some of them did! And fought side by side with the partisans! But
according to Stalin's rules that didn't soften their sentences in the least.) However, in the case of
some, the shame of 1941, that stunning defeat after long, long years of braggadocio, ate at their
hearts. Some believed that the primary guilt for those in- human POW camps belonged to Stalin.
They, too, wanted the chance to speak out about themselves and their awful experi- ence: to affirm
that they, too, were particles of Russia, and wanted to influence Russia's future, and not to be the
puppets of other people's mistakes.

But fate played them an even bitterer trick, and they became more abject pawns than before. The
Germans, in their shallow stupidity and self-importance, allowed them only to die for the German
Reich, but denied them the right to plan an independent destiny for Russia.

And the Allies were two thousand versts away — and anyway, what kind of allies would they indeed
turn out to be?

The term "Vlasovite" in our country has the same force as the word "sewage." We feel we are
dirtying our mouths merely by pronouncing it, and therefore no one dares utter a sentence with
"Vlasovite" as its subject.

But that is no way to write history. Now, a quarter of a cen- tury later, when most of them have
perished in camps and those who have survived are living out their lives in the Far North, I would
like to issue a reminder, through these pages, that this was a phenomenon totally unheard of in all
world history: that several hundred thousand young men, aged twenty to thirty, took up arms against
their Fatherland as allies of its most evil enemy.

[This, in fact, is the number of Soviet citizens who were in the Wehr- macht — in pre- Vlasov and
Vlasov formations, and in the Cossack, Moslem, Baltic, and Ukrainian units and detachments.]

Perhaps there is something to ponder here: Who was more to blame, those youths or the gray
Fatherland? One cannot explain this treason biologically. It has to have had a social cause.

Because, as the old proverb says: Well-fed horses don't ram- page.

Then picture to yourself a field in which starved, neglected, crazed horses are rampaging back and
forth.



That same spring many Russian emigres were also in those cells.

It was very like a dream: the resurrection of buried history. The weighty tomes on the Civil War had
long since been com- pleted and their covers shut tight. The causes for which people fought in it had
been decided. The chronology of its events had been set down in textbooks. The leaders of the White
movement were, it appeared, no longer our contemporaries on earth but mere ghosts of a past that
had melted away. The Russian emigres had been more cruelly dispersed than the tribes of Israel.
And, in our Soviet imagination, if they were still dragging out their lives somewhere, it was as
pianists in stinking little restaurants, as lackeys, laundresses, beggars, morphine and cocaine addicts,
and virtual corpses. Right up to 1941, when the war came, it would have been impossible to find out
from any hints in our newspapers, our lofty literature, our criticism of the arts (nor did our own well-
fed masters of art and literature help us find out) that Russia Abroad was a great spiritual world, that
in it Russian philosophy was living and developing; that out there were philosophers like Bulgakov,
Berdyayev, and Lossky; that Russian art had enchanted the world; that Rachmaninoff, Chal- iapin,
Benois, Diaghilev, Pavlova, and the Don Cossack Chorus of Jaroff were out there; that profound
studies of Dostoyevsky were being undertaken (at a time when he was anathema in the Soviet
Union) ; that the incredible writer Nabokov-Sirin also existed out there; that Bunin himself was still
alive and had been writing for all these twenty years; that journals of the arts were being published;
that theatrical works were being produced; that Russians from the same areas of Russia came
together in groups where their mother tongue could be heard; and that emigre men had not given up
marrying emigre women, who in turn presented them with children, which meant young people our
own age.

The picture of emigration presented in our country was so falsified that if one had conducted a mass
survey to ask which side the Russian emigres were on in the Spanish Civil War, or else, perhaps,
what side they were on in the Second World War, with one voice everyone would have replied: For
Franco! For Hitler! Even now people in our country do not know that many more White emigres
fought on the Republican side in Spain. That both the Vlasov divisions and the Cossack corps of von
Pannwitz (the "Krasnov" corps) were made up of Soviet citizens and not of emigres. The emigres did
not support Hitler. They ostracized Merezhkovsky and Gippius, who took Hitler's part, leaving them
to alienated loneliness. There was a joke — except it wasn't a joke — to the effect that Denikin wanted
to fight for the Soviet Union against Hitler, and that at one time Stalin planned to arrange his return
to the Motherland, not for military reasons, obviously, but as a symbol of national unity. During the
German occupation of France, a horde of Russian emigres, young and old, joined the Resistance.
And after the liberation of Paris they swarmed to the Soviet Embassy to apply for per- mission to
return to the Motherland. No matter what kind of Russia it was — it was still Russia! That was their
slogan, and that is how they proved they had not been lying previously about their love for her.
(Imprisoned in 1945 and 1946, they were almost happy that these prison bars and these jailers were
their own, Russian. And they observed with surprise the Soviet boys scratching their heads and
saying: "Why the hell did we come back? Wasn't there room enough for us in Europe?")

But, given that Stalinist logic which said that every Soviet person who had lived abroad had to be
imprisoned in camp, how could the emigres possibly escape the same lot? In the Balkans, Central
Europe, Harbin, they were arrested as soon as the Soviet armies arrived. They were arrested in their
apartments and on the street, just like Soviet citizens. For a while State Security arrested only men,
and not all of them, only those who had in one or another way revealed a political bias. Later on,
their families were transported to exile in Russia, but some were left where they were in Bulgaria
and Czechoslovakia. In France they were welcomed into Soviet citizenship with honors and flowers
and sent back to the Motherland in comfort; and only when they got to the U.S.S.R. were they raked
in. Things dragged out longer for the Shanghai emigres. In 1945 Russian hands didn't reach that far.
But a plenipotentiary from the Soviet government went to Shanghai and announced a decree of the
Presidium of the Supreme Soviet extending forgiveness to all emigres. Well, now, how could one
refuse to believe that? The government cer- tainly couldn't lie! Whether or not there actually was
such a decree, it did not, in any case, tie the hands of the Organs. The Shanghai Russians expressed



their delight. They were told they could take with them as many possessions as they wanted and
whatever they wanted. They went home with automobiles — the country could put them to good use.
They were told they could settle wherever they wanted to in the Soviet Union and, of course, work at
any profession or trade. They were transported from Shanghai in steamships. The fate of the
passengers varied. On some of the ships, for some reason, they were given no food at all. They also
suffered various fates after reaching the port of Nakhodka (which was, incidentally, one of the main
transit centers of Gulag). Almost all of them were loaded into freight cars, like prisoners, except that
they had, as yet, no strict convoy, and there were no police dogs. Some of them were actually de-
livered to inhabited places, to cities, and allowed to live there for two or three years. Others were
delivered in trainloads straight to their camps and were dumped out somewhere off a high
embankment into the forest beyond the Volga, together with their white pianos and their jardinieres.
In 1948-1949, the former Far Eastern emigres who had until then managed to stay out of camps were
scraped up to the last man.

As a nine-year-old boy I had read the small dark-blue books of V. V. Shulgin with more interest than
I had read Jules Verne. At that time they were sold openly in our book stalls. His was a voice from a
world that had disappeared with such finality that not even the most extravagant fantasy could have
projected that invisible point in the soundless corridors of the Big Lub- yanka where his steps would
intersect my own before twenty years had passed. True, I would not meet the man himself until an-
other twenty years had gone by. But I had time to study attentively many emigres, old and young, in
the spring of 1945.

I underwent a medical examination with Captain Borshch and Colonel Mariyushkin. And the pitiful
sight of their naked, wrinkled, dark-yellow bodies, not bodies any longer but mum- mies, has always
remained before my eyes. They were arrested five minutes this side of the grave, so to speak, and
brought to Moscow from several thousand miles away, and there in Mos- cow, in 1945, an
interrogation was proceeding in the most serious way on ... their struggle against Soviet power in
1919!

We have become so used to the piling up of injustices during interrogation and trial that we have
ceased drawing any dis- tinctions of degree between them. This captain and this colonel were veteran
officers of the Tsar's Russian Army. They had both been over forty, and they had both served in the
army for twenty years, when the telegraph brought them news that the Tsar had been overthrown in
Petrograd. For twenty years they had served the Tsar according to their oath. And now, against their
wills — for all we know, possibly muttering "Beat it! Scram!" to themselves — they swore loyalty to
the Provisional Govern- ment. After that, no one asked them to swear any more oaths because the
whole army fell apart. They didn't like the new scheme of things, wherein soldiers tore shoulder
boards off offi- cers and killed them, and it was natural for them to join other officers to fight against
it. And it was natural for the Red Army to fight against them and push them into the sea. But in a
coun- try in which at least the rudiments of jurisprudence exist, what basis was there for putting them
on trial, and a quarter of a cen- tury later at that? (They had lived as private persons all that time . . .
Mariyushkin up to the very moment of his arrest. Borshch, to be sure, had turned up in a Cossack
wagon train in Austria, but in a transport, with the old men and women, not in an armed unit.)

However, in 1945, in the very center of Soviet jurisdiction, they were charged with: actions directed
toward the overthrow of the government of the workers' and peasants' Soviets; armed incursion into
Soviet territory, in other words, not having im- mediately left Russia when Petrograd was declared
Soviet; aiding the international bourgeoisie (which they had never seen even in their dreams) ;
serving counterrevolutionary governments (i.e., their own generals, to whom they had been
subordinate all their lives). And all these sections — Nos. 1, 2, 4, 13 — of Article 58 were included in a
Criminal Code adopted in 1926, that is, six to seven years after the end of the Civil War. This was a
classic and unconscionable example of the ex post facto application of a law! In addition, Article 2 of
the Code specified that it applied only to citizens taken into custody on the territory of the Russian
Republic. But State Security's strong right arm had grabbed people who were in no wise Soviet



citizens from all the countries of Europe and Asia.

[On this basis no single African leader has any assurance that we will not, ten years from now,
promulgate a law in accordance with which we will put him on trial for what he does today. Yes.
The Chinese, in fact, will pro- mulgate precisely such laws — just give them the chance to reach out
that far.]

And we won't even bring up the question of statutes of limitations. This question was provided for
very flexibly — no statutes of limitations applied to Article 58. {"Why stir up the past indeed?") Such
statutes are invoked only in the case of our home-grown executioners, who have destroyed many,
many more of their compatriots than did the whole Civil War.

Mariyushkin, at least, remembered everything clearly. He told us the details of being evacuated from
Novorossisk. But Borshch had already descended into second childhood and prattled on and on
about celebrating Easter in the Lubyanka: he had eaten only half his bread ration during Palm
Sunday week and Holy Week and had set the rest of it aside, gradually replacing the stale pieces
with fresh ones. Thus he had accumulated seven full rations when it came time to break the Lenten
fast — and he had "feasted" for the three days of Easter.

I do not know what kind of White Guards they were in the Civil War, either of them, whether they
were among the ex- ceptional few who hung every tenth worker without trial and whipped the
peasants, or whether they were the other kind, the soldierly majority. The fact that they were being
interrogated and sentenced in Moscow was no proof of anything nor a matter of any consequence.
But if, from that time on, they had lived for a quarter of a century, not as retired officers, on pensions
and with honor, but as homeless exiles, then how could anyone point to any moral basis for trying
them? That is the kind of dialectic Anatole France mastered, but which we cannot seem to grasp.
According to Anatole France, by the time it's today, yesterday's martyr is already in the wrong — in
fact, from the first minute the red shirt covered his body. And vice versa. But our version is: If they
rode me for one short year, when I had just outgrown being a foal, then I am called a riding horse all
my life, even though I have long since been used only as a cab horse.

Colonel Konstantin Konstantinovich Yasevich was very dif- ferent from these helpless emigre
mummies. For him, clearly, the end of the Civil War had not ended the struggle against Bolshevism.
As to how he continued to struggle — where and with what — he did not enlighten me. But the sense
that he was still in the service remained with him in the cell itself. In the midst of all the chaotic
concepts, the blurred and broken lines of vision, in most of our heads, he had, evidently, a clear and
exact view of everything around him; as a result of this reasoned point of view on life, his body, too,
exhibited a steady strength, re- siliency, and activity. He was certainly not less than sixty. His head
was totally bald, without a single hair. He had already survived his interrogation and was awaiting
his sentence, like the rest of us. He could expect no help from anywhere, of course. But he kept his
young, even rosy skin. Among all of us in the cell, he alone did exercises every morning and washed
himself at the faucet. The rest of us were trying not to squander the calories in our prison ration. He
put his time to use, and whenever an aisle opened up between the rows of board bunks, he paced
those fifteen to twenty feet with a precise stride and a precise profile, crossing his arms over his
chest and staring through the walls with clear young eyes.

And the difference between us and him was that we were all astonished at what was happening to us,
while nothing around him contradicted his expectations, and precisely for that reason he was
absolutely alone in the cell.

A year later, I was able to appraise his conduct in prison. Once again I was in the Butyrki, and in one
of those seventy cells I met some young codefendants of Yasevich who had al- ready been sentenced
to ten and fifteen years. The sentences given everyone in their group were typed out on cigarette
paper, and for some reason they had it in their possession. Yasevich was first on the list, and his



sentence was : to be shot. So that was what he saw — what he foresaw — through the wall with his
still- young eyes as he paced back and forth from the table to the door! But his unimpaired
consciousness of the correctness of his path in life lent him extraordinary strength.

Among the emigres was one my own age, Igor Tronko. We became friends. Both of us were weak,
dried out; our skin was grayish- yellow on our bones. (Why had we collapsed to such an extent? I
think the main cause was spiritual confusion.) Both of us were thin and on the tall side, and we were
shaken by the gusts of summer wind in the Butyrki courtyards. We always walked side by side, with
the careful steps of old men, and dis- cussed the parallels in our lives. He had been born in South
Russia the same year as I. We were still nursing babes when fate stuck her hand into her well-worn
purse and drew out a short straw for me and a long one for him. So it was that he rolled off across the
sea, even though his White Guard father was just a rank-and-file, unpropertied telegrapher.

I found it interesting in the extreme to picture through his life all those compatriots of my generation
who had landed outside Russia. They had grown up under good family supervision and in very
modest, even meager, circumstances. They were all very well brought up and, within the range of
existing possibilities, well educated. They grew up without knowing fear or repression, though the
White organizations maintained a certain yoke of authority over them until they themselves grew
strong. They grew up in such a way that the sins to which all European youth was subject in that
period — a high crime rate, a frivolous atti- tude toward life, thoughtlessness, dissipation — did not
touch them. That was because they grew up, so to speak, in the shadow of the indelible misfortune
which had befallen their families. Whatever country they grew up in, they looked on Russia alone as
their Motherland. Their spiritual upbringing was based on Russian literature, all the more beloved
because to them it was the beginning and end of their Motherland, because for them their
Motherland did not exist as a primary geographi- cal and physical fact. The contemporary printed
word was much more generally accessible to them than to us, but they received Soviet books in
conspicuously small quantities. And they felt this lack all the more keenly; it seemed to them chiefly
respon- sible for their inability to understand what was most important, highest, and most beautiful
in Soviet Russia; and that the books they did receive presented a distortion, a lie; were incomplete.

The picture they had of our real life was very, very faint, but their longing for their Motherland was
such that if we had called on them in 1941 they would all have joined the Red Army, and it would
have been even sweeter for them to die than to survive. These young people from twenty-five to
twenty-seven already represented and firmly defended several points of view, in defi- nite conflict
with the opinions of the old generals and political leaders. Thus Igor's group was called the
"nepredreshentsy" — the "non-prejudgers": they declared that anyone who had not shared with the
Motherland the whole, complex burden of the past decades had no right to decide anything about the
future of Russia, nor even to presuppose anything, but should simply go and lend his strength to
whatever the people might decide.

We would often lie beside one another on the wooden bunks. I tried to understand his world as best I
could, and our encounter revealed to me a concept confirmed by later encounters — that the outflow
from Russia of a significant part of her spiritual forces, which occurred in the Civil War, had
deprived us of a great and important stream of Russian culture. Everyone who really loves that
culture will strive for the reunion of both streams, the one at home and the tributary abroad. Only
then will our culture attain wholeness. Only then will it reveal its capacity for benign development.

And I dream of living until that day.

A human being is weak, weak. In the end, that spring, even the most stubborn of us wanted
forgiveness and were ready to give up a lot for just a little bit more life. An anecdote was current
among us: "What is your last word, accused?" "I beg you to send me wherever you please, just as
long as it is under the Soviet government and the sun is there!" No one was threatening to deprive us
of the Soviet government, of course: just of the sun. No one wanted to be sent beyond the Arctic



Circle, to scurvy and malnutrition. For some reason, a legend about the Altai region in particular
flourished in the cells. Those rare persons who had been there at one time or another, but especially
those who had never been there, wove melodious dreams about the wonderful country of the Altai
for their cellmates! It had the vast expanses of Siberia and a mild climate. Rivers of honey flowing
between banks of wheat. The steppe and mountains. Herds of sheep, flocks of wildfowl, shoals of
fish. Populous, rich villages.

[Does not the prisoner's dream of the Altai simply continue the old peasant dream about it? The so-
called lands of His Majesty's Cabinet were in the Altai, and because of this the area was closed to
colonization much longer than the rest of Siberia. But it was there that the peasants wanted most of
all to settle — and where they actually settled. Is it not from this that the enduring legend has arisen?]

Oh, if only we could find a hiding place in that quiet! If only we could listen to the pure resounding
of the cock crow in the unpolluted air! Or stroke the good, serious face of a horse! Curses on you, all
you great problems! Let someone else beat his head against you, someone more stupid. Oh, just to
rest there from the interrogator's mother oaths and the monotonous un- winding of your whole Ufe,
from the crash of the prison locks, from the suffocating stuffiness of the cell. Only one life is allotted
us, one small, short life! And we had been criminal enough to push ours in front of somebody's
machine guns, or drag it with us, still unsullied, into the dirty rubbish heap of politics. There, in the
Altai, it appeared, one could live in the lowest, darkest hut on the edge of the village, next to the
forest. And one could go into the woods, not for brushwood and not for mushrooms, but just to go,
for no reason, and hug two tree trunks: Dear ones, you're all I need.

And the spring itself sounded a summons to mercy. It was the spring that marked the ending of such
an enormous war! We saw that millions of us prisoners were flowing past and knew that millions
more would greet us in the camps. It just couldn't be that so many people were to remain in prison
after the greatest victory in the world! It was just to frighten us that they were holding us for the time
being: so that we might remember and take heed. Of course, there would soon be a total amnesty and
all of us would be released. Someone even swore that he had read in a newspaper that Stalin,
replying to some American correspondent (whose name I cannot remember), said that after the war
there would be an amnesty the like of which the world had never seen. And one of the interrogators
had actually said to someone else that there would soon be a general amnesty. (These rumors were a
help to the interrogators because they weakened the prisoners' will: The hell with him, let's sign — it
isn't going to be for long anyway.)

But... for mercy one must have wisdom. This has been a truth throughout our history and will remain
one for a long time to come.

We did not heed the few sober minds among us who croaked out that never, in a whole quarter-
century, had there been an amnesty for political prisoners — and that there never would be one. Some
cell expert among the stool pigeons leaped up with an answer: "Yes, there was! In 1927. For the
tenth anniversary of the Revolution. All the prisons were emptied, and white flags were flown on all
of them." This astonishing vision of white flags on the prisons — why white? — was particularly
striking.

[Vyshinsky, Ot Tyurem k Vospitatelnym Uchrezhdeniyam, p. 396, presents the figures. In the 1927
amnesty, 7.3 percent of the prisoners were amnestied. This is a credible figure. Pretty poor for a
tenth anniversary. Among the political prisoners, women with children were freed and those who had
only a few months left to serve. In the Verkhne-Uralsk Prison Isolator, for example, twelve out of the
two hundred prisoners there were released. But, in the middle of it, they regretted even this wretched
amnesty and began to block it: they delayed some releases, and some people who were freed were
given a "minus" restriction instead of full freedom to go where they pleased.]

We brushed aside those wise individuals among us who explained that millions of us were



imprisoned precisely because the war had ended. We were no longer needed at the front. We were
danger- ous in the rear. And, were it not for us, not one brick would ever get laid at the remote
construction projects. We were too self- absorbed even to grasp Stalin's simple economic
calculations — let alone his malice. Just who this year, after being demobilized, would want to leave
his family and home and go off to the Kolyma, to Vorkuta, to Siberia, where there were neither roads
nor houses? It was virtually the job of the State Planning Com- mission to assign to the MVD the
number of workers required for plan fulfillment and thus the number to be arrested. An amnesty, a
broad and generous amnesty, was what we waited for and thirsted for! Somebody said that in
England prisoners were amnestied on the anniversary of the coronation, in other words, every year.
Many politicals had been amnestied on the three hundredth anniversary of the Romanovs, in 1912.
Could it really be possible that now, after we had won a victory which would resound throughout our
entire era and even longer, the Stalin government would be petty and vengeful and would hang onto
its resentment of every stumble and slip of each of its minuscule subjects?

There is a simple truth which one can learn only through suffer- ing: in war not victories are blessed
but defeats. Governments need victories and the people need defeats. Victory gives rise to the desire
for more victories. But after a defeat it is freedom that men desire — and usually attain. A people
needs defeat just as an individual needs suffering and misfortune: they compel the deepening of the
inner life and generate a spiritual upsurge.

The Poltava victory was a great misfortune for Russia: it resulted in two centuries of great strain and
stress, ruin, the ab- sence of freedom — and war and war again. The Poltava victory spelled salvation
for the Swedes. Having lost the appetite for war, the Swedes became the most prosperous and the
freest people in Europe.

[Perhaps, only in the twentieth century, if one is to believe the stories one hears, has their stagnating
well-being led to moral indigestion.]

We are so used to taking pride in our victory over Napoleon that we leave out of account the fact that
because of it the eman- cipation of the serfs did not take place a half-century sooner. Because of it,
the strengthened monarchy destroyed the Decem- brists. (The French occupation was never a reality
for Russia.) But the Crimean War, and the Japanese War, and our war with Germany in the First
World War — all those defeats brought us freedom and revolution.

We believed in amnesty that spring, we weren't being at all original in this. Talking with old
prisoners, one gradually dis- covers that this thirst for mercy and this faith in mercy is never absent
within gray prison walls. For decades and decades, wave after wave of prisoners has thirsted for and
believed in either an amnesty, or a new Code, or a general review of cases. And the rumors about
these things have always been supported by the Organs with skilled caution. The prisoner's
imagination sees the ardently awaited arrival of the angel of liberation in just about anything: the
next anniversary of the October Revolution, Len- in's anniversaries. Victory Day, Red Army Day,
Paris Commune Day, every new session of the AU-Russian Central Executive Committee — the
VTsIK — the end of every Five- Year Plan, every Plenary Session of the Supreme Court! And the
wilder the arrests, the more Homeric and mind-boggling the scale of the waves of prisoners, the
more they inspired not sober-mindedness but faith in amnesty!

All sources of light can to some degree be compared with the Sun. And the Sun cannot be compared
with anything. So it is that all the expectations in the world can be compared with the expectation of
amnesty, but the expectation of amnesty cannot be compared with anything else.

In the spring of 1945, every newcomer to the cell was asked first of all what he had heard about an
amnesty. And if two or three prisoners were taken from their cells with their things, the cell experts
immediately compared cases and drew the conclusion that theirs were the least serious cases and
they had clearly been taken out to be released. It had begun! In the toilet and in the baths — the



prisoners' post offices — our "activists" looked every- where for signs and graffiti about the amnesty.
And one day at the beginning of July, in the famous lavender vestibule of the Butyrki baths, we read
the enormous prophecy written in soap on a glazed lavender slab far higher than a man's head —
which meant that one man had stood on another's shoulders in order to write it in a place where it
would take longer to erase:

"Hurrah!! Amnesty on July 17!"

[Indeed, the bastards were wrong by only one digit! For more details on the great Stalin amnesty of
July 7, 1945, see Part III, Chapter 6.]

What a celebration went on! ("After all, if they hadn't known for sure, they wouldn't have written
it!") Everything that beat, pulsed, circulated in the body came to a stop beneath the wave of
happiness, the expectation that the doors were about to swing open.

But . . . for mercy one must have wisdom.

In the middle of July, the corridor jailer sent one old man from our cell to wash down the toilet, and
while they were there eye to eye — for he wouldn't have dared in the presence of witnesses — he
looked sympathetically at the prisoner's gray head and asked: "What's your article, father?" "Fifty-
eight!" The old man lit up. At home three generations were mourning his arrest. "You're not
included," sighed the jailer. Nonsense, we decided in the cell: just an illiterate jailer.

There was also a young man from Kiev in the cell, Valentin. I can't remember his family name. He
had big eyes that were beautiful in a feminine way, and he was terrified by the interroga- tion. There
is no doubt that he had the gift of precognition — per- haps only in his then current state of
excitement. More than once, he went around the cell in the morning and pointed: Today they are
going to come for you and you. I saw it in my dream. And they came and got them ... the very
individuals he had pointed out. One might add that a prisoner's heart is so inclined toward mysticism
that he accepts precognition almost without surprise.

On July 27 Valentin came up to me: "Aleksandr! Today it is our turn." And he told me a dream that
had all the characteristics of prison dreams: a bridge across a muddy stream, a cross. I began to get
my things together. And it was not for nothing either. He and I were summoned after morning tea.
Our cellmates saw us off with noisy good wishes, and many of them assured us we were going off to
freedom. They had figured it out by compar- ing our less serious cases.

Perhaps you honestly don't believe it. Perhaps you won't allow yourself to believe. You can try to
brush it aside with jokes. But flaming pincers, hotter than anything else on earth, suddenly close
around your heart. They just do. Suppose it's true?

They assembled twenty of us from various cells and took us to the baths first. Before every big
change in his life, the prisoner has first of all to take a bath. We had time enough there, an hour and a
half, to exchange our hunches and ideas. At that point, all steamed up, our skins tender, we were
taken through the httle emerald park in the Butyrki's interior courtyard, where the birds sang
deafeningly, although they were probably only sparrows, and the green of the trees seemed
unbearably bright to eyes no longer used to it. Never had my eyes seen the green of the leaves with
such intensity as they did that spring! And never in my life had I seen anything closer to God's
paradise than that little Butyrki park, which never took more than thirty seconds to cross on the
asphalt path.

[Many years later, this time as a tourist, I saw another, similar park, except that it was even smaller,
in the Trubetskoi bastion of the Peter and Paul Fortress in Leningrad. The other tourists exclaimed
over the darkness of the corridors and cells, but I kept thinking to myself that with such a park to



walk in, the prisoners of the Trubetskoi bastion were not lost men. Wie were taken out to walk only in
deathly cell-Uke stone enclosures.]

They took us to the Butyrki station — a very well-chosen nick- name for that reception and dispatch
point, especially because its main hall was really like a good railroad station. They pushed us into a
large, spacious box. It was half-dark inside and the air was clean and fresh, since its one and only
little window was very high up and had no "muzzle." And it opened on that same sunny little park,
and through the transom the birds' twitter deafened us, and in the opening a little bright-green twig
hung, promising us all freedom and home. (We had never been imprisoned in such a good box — and
that couldn't be a matter of chance! )

And we were all cases for the OSO's — the Special Boards at- tached to the GPU-NKVD. And it
turned out that each of us had been imprisoned for nothing much.

No one touched us for three hours. No one opened the doors. We paced up and down the box and,
finally, tired out, we sat down on the slab benches. And the little twig kept bobbing and bobbing
outside the opening, and the sparrows screamed as if they were possessed.

Suddenly the door crashed open, and one of us was summoned, a quiet bookkeeper, thirty-five years
old. He went out. The door was locked. We started running about our box even more agi- tatedly
than before. We were on hot coals.

Once more the crash of the door. They called another one out and readmitted the first. We rushed to
him. But he was not the same man! The life had gone out of his face. His wide-open eyes were
unseeing. His movements were uncertain as he stum- bled across the smooth floor of the box. Was
he in a state of shock? Had they swatted him with an ironing board?

"Well? Well?" we asked him, with sinking hearts. (If he had not in fact just gotten up from the
electric chair, he must at the very least have been given a death sentence. ) And in the voice of one
reporting the end of the universe, the bookkeeper managed to blurt out:

"Five . . . years!"

And once more the door crashed. That was how quickly they returned, as if they were only being
taken to the toilet to urinate. The second man returned, all aglow. Evidently he was being re- leased.

"Well, well, come on?" We swarmed around him, our hopes rising again. He waved his hand,
choking with laughter.

"Fifteen years!"

It was just too absurd to be believed.

Chapter 7

In the Engine Room

The box adjacent to the so-called Butyrki "station" was the famow?, frisking box, where new arrivals
were searched. It had space enough for five or six jailers to process up to twenty zeks in one batch.
Now, however, it was empty and the rough-hewn search tables had nothing on them. Over at one
side of the room, seated behind a small nondescript table beneath a small lamp, was a neat, black-
haired NKVD major. Patient boredom was what his face chiefly revealed. The intervals during
which the zeks were brought in and led out one by one were a waste of his time. Their signatures
could have been collected much, much faster.



He indicated that I was to sit down on the stool opposite him, on the other side of his table. He asked
my name. To the right and left of the inkwell lay two piles of white papers the size of a half-sheet of
typewriter paper, all looking much the same. In format they were just like the fuel requisitions
handed out in apartment-house management offices, or warrants in official institutions for purchase
of office supplies. Leafing through the pile on the right, the major found the paper which referred to
me. He pulled it out and read it aloud to me in a bored patter. (I understood I had been sentenced to
eight years.) Immediately, he began to write a statement on the back of it, with a fountain pen, to the
effect that the text had been read to me on the particular date.

My heart didn't give an extra half -beat — it was all so everyday and routine. Could this really be my
sentence — the turning point in my life? I would have liked to feel nervous, to experience this
moment to the full, but I just couldn't. And the major had already pushed the sheet over to me, the
blank side facing up. And a schoolchild's seven-kopeck pen, with a bad point that had lint on it from
the inkwell, lay there in front of me.

"No, I have to read it myself."

"Do you really think I would deceive you?" the major objected lazily. "Well, go ahead, read it."

Unwillingly, he let the paper out of his hand. I turned it over and began to look through it with
deliberate slowness, not just word by word but letter by letter. It had been typed, but what I had in
front of me was not the original but a carbon:

EXTRACT

from a decree of the OSO of the NKVD of the U.S.S.R.
of July?, 1945, No. .

[ They had met to sentence me on the very day of the amnesty. The work must go on. . . .]

All of this was underscored with a dotted line and the sheet was vertically divided with a dotted line:



Copy verified. Secretary

Was I really just supposed to sign and leave in silence? I looked at the major — to see whether he
intended to say something to me, whether he might not provide some clarification. No, he had no
such intention. He had already nodded to the jailer at the door to get the next prisoner ready.

To give the moment at least a little importance, I asked him, with a tragic expression: "But, really,
this is terrible! Eight years! What for?"

And I could hear how false my own words sounded. Neither he nor I detected anything terrible.

"Right there." The major showed me once again where to sign. I signed. I could simply not think of
anything else to do.



Decreed:



Case heard:

Accusation of so-and-so
(name, year of birth,
place of birth)



To designate for so-and-so (name)
for anti-Soviet propaganda, and for
an attempt to create an anti- Soviet
organization, 8 (eight) years in



corrective labor camps.



"In that case, allow me to write an appeal right here. After all, the sentence is unjust."

"As provided by regulations," the major assented with a nod, placing my sheet of paper on the left-
hand pile.

"Let's move along," commanded the jailer.
And I moved along.

(I had not really shown much initiative. Georgi Tenno, who, to be sure, had been handed a paper
worth twenty-five years, answered: "After all, this is a life sentence. In olden times they used to beat
the drums and assemble a crowd when a person was given a life sentence. And here it's like being on
a list for a soap ration — twenty-five years and run along!"

Arnold Rappoport took the pen and wrote on the back of the verdict: "I protest categorically this
terroristic, illegal sentence and demand immediate release." The officer who had handed it to him
had at first waited patiently, but when he read what Rappoport had written, he was enraged and tore
up the paper with the note on it. So what! The term remained in force anyway. This was just a copy.

Vera Komeyeva was expecting fifteen years and she saw with delight that there was a typo on the
official sheet — it read only//ve. She laughed her luminous laugh and hurried to sign before they took
it back. The officer looked at her dubiously: "Do you really understand what I read to you?" "Yes,
yes, thank you very much. Five years in corrective-labor camps."

The ten-year sentence of Janos Rozsas, a Hungarian, was read to him in the corridor in Russian,
without any translation. He signed it, not knowing it was his sentence, and he waited a long time
afterward for his trial. Still later, when he was in camp, he recalled the incident very vaguely and
realized what had happened.)

I returned to the box with a smile. It was strange. Each minute I became jollier and more relieved.
Everyone was returning with "ten-ruble bills," including Valentin. The lightest term in our group that
day had been given the bookkeeper who had gone out of his mind. He was still, in fact, beside
himself. And the lightest term after his was mine.

In the splashes of sun and the July breeze, the little twig outside the window continued to bob up and
down as gaily as before. We chattered boisterously. Here and there, more and more frequently,
laughter resounded in the box. We were laughing because everything had gone off so smoothly. We
were laughing at the shocked bookkeeper. We were laughing at our morning hopes and at the way
our cellmates had seen us off and arranged secret signals with us to be transmitted via food parcels —
four potatoes or two bagels!

"Well, anyway, there is going to be an amnesty!" several affirmed. 'AH this is just for form's sake
and it doesn't mean anything. They want to give us a good scare so we'll keep in line. Stalin told an
American correspondent — "

"What was his name?"

"I don't remember his name."

So they ordered us to take our things, formed us up by twos, and led us once again through that same
marvelous little park filled with summer. And where did they take us? Once again to the baths.

And, oh, what a peal of laughter that got! My God, what silly nincompoops! Still roaring, we
undressed, hung our duds on the same trolley hooks and rolled them into the same roaster they'd



already been rolled into that very morning. Roaring, each of us took a small sliver of repulsive soap
and went into the spacious, resonant shower room to wash off our girlish gaiety. We splashed about
in there, pouring hot clean water on ourselves, and we got to romping about as if we were school
kids who had come to the baths after their last exam. This cleansing, relieving laughter was, I think,
not really sick but a living defense for the salvation of the organism.

As we dried ourselves off, Valentin said to me, reassuringly, intimately: "Well, all right. We are still
young. We are going to live a long time yet. The main thing is not to make a misstep now. We are
going to a camp — and we'll not say one word to anyone, so they won't plaster new terms on us. We
will work honestly — and keep our mouths shut. "

And he really believed in his program, that naive little kernel of grain caught between StaUn's
millstones! He really had his hopes set on it. One wanted to agree with him, to serve out the term
cozily, and then expunge from one's head what one had lived through.

But I had begun to sense a truth inside myself: if in order to live it is necessary not to live, then
what's it all for?

One cannot really say that the OSO had been conceived after the Revolution. Catherine the Great
had sentenced the journalist Novikov, whom she disliked, to fifteen years on, one might say, an OSO
basis, since she didn't turn him over to a court. And all the Tsars once in a while, in a fatherly way,
exiled without any trial those who had incurred their displeasure. In the 1860's, a basic court reform
took place. It seemed as if rulers and subjects had both begun to develop something like a juridical
view of society. And yet in the seventies and eighties Korolenko tracked down cases where
administrative repression had usurped the role of judicial judgment. In 1872, he himself and two
other students were exiled without trial, on the orders of the Deputy Minister of State Properties — a
typical case of an OSO. Another time, he and his brother were exiled without trial to Glazov.
Korolenko has also given us the name of one Fyodor Bogdan, an emissary from the peasants — a
khodok — who got right up to the Tsar himself and was then exiled. And of Pyankov, too, who was
acquitted by a court and yet exiled by order of the Tsar. And there were several others as well. And
Vera Zasulich explained in a letter sent after she emigrated that she had not run away from the court
and a trial but from nonjudicial administrative repression.

Thus the tradition of the "dotted line" — the administratively issued sentence — dragged on. But it was
too lax; it was suitable for a drowsy Asiatic country, but not for a country that was rapidly
advancing. . . . Moreover, it lacked any definite identity: who was the OSO? Sometimes it was the

Tsar, sometimes the governor, sometimes the deputy minister. And if it was still possible to
enumerate names and cases, this was not, begging your pardon, real scope.

Real scope entered the picture with the twenties, when permanently operating Troikas — panels of
three, operating behind closed doors — were created to bypass the courts permanently. In the
beginning they even flaunted it proudly — the Troika of the GPU. Not only did they not conceal the
names of the members; they publicized them. Who on the Solovetsky Islands did not know the
names of the famous Moscow Troika — Gleb Boky, Vul, and Vasilyev? Yes, and what a word it was,
in fact — troika! It bore a slight hint of sleigh bells on the shaft bow; the celebration of Shrovetide;
and, interwoven with all this, a mystery. Why "troika"? What did it mean? After all, a court wasn't a
quartet either! And a Troika wasn't a court! And the biggest mystery of all lay in the fact that it was
kept out of sight. We hadn't been there. We hadn't seen it. All we got was a piece of paper. Sign
here! The Troika was even more frightening than a Revolutionary Tribunal. It set itself even farther
apart, muffled itself up, locked itself in a separate room, and — soon — concealed the names of its
members. Thus we grew used to the idea that the Troika members didn't eat or drink or move about
among ordinary people. Once they had isolated themselves in order to go into session, they were shut
off for good, and all we knew of them were the sentences handed out through typists. (And they had
to be returned too. Such documents couldn't be left in the hands of individuals!)



These Troikas (we use the plural just in case, because — as with a deity — we never know where or in
what form it exists) satisfied a persistent need that had arisen: never to allow those arrested to return
to freedom (This was like an OTK — a Department for Quality Control in industry — but in this case it
was attached to the GPU — to prevent any spoiled goods.) If it turned out that someone was innocent
and could therefore not be tried at all, then let him have his "minus 32" via the Troika — which meant
he couldn't live in any of the provincial capitals — or let him spend two or three years in exile, after
which he would have a convict's clipped ear, would always be a marked man, and, from then on, a
recidivist.

(Please forgive us, reader. We have once more gone astray with this rightist opportunism — this
concept of "guilt," and of the guilty or innocent. It has, after all, been explained to us that the heart of
the matter is not personal guilt, but social danger. One can imprison an innocent person if he is
socially hostile. And one can release a guilty man if he is socially friendly. But lacking legal training,
we can be forgiven, for the 1926 Code, according to which, my good fellow, we lived for twenty-
five years and more, was itself criticized for an "impermissible bourgeois approach," for an
"insufficiently class-conscious approach," and for some kind of "bourgeois weighing of punishments
in relation to the gravity of what had been committed.")

Alas, it is not for us to write the absorbing history of this particular Organ: how the Troikas turned
into OSO's; or when they got renamed; or whether there were OSO's in provincial centers, or just
one of them in the Great Palace; or which of our great and proud leaders were members; or how
often they met and how long their sessions lasted; whether or not they were served tea while they
worked, and if they were, what was served with the tea; and how the work itself proceeded — did
they converse while it was going on or not? We are not the ones who will write this history —
because we don't know. All that we have heard is that the essence of the OSO was triune. And even
though it is still impossible to name its industrious members, yet we do know the three organs
permanently represented there: one member represented the Central Committee of the Party, one the
MVD, and one the Chief Prosecutor's office. However, it would not be a miracle if we should learn
someday that there were never any sessions, and that there was only a staff of experienced typists
composing extracts from nonexistent records of proceedings, and one general administrator who
directed the typists. As for typists, there were certainly typists. That we can guarantee.

Up to 1924, the authority of the Troika was limited to sentences of three years, maximum. From
1924 on, they moved up to five years of camp; from 1937 on, the OSO could turn out "ten-ruble
bills"; after 1948, they could rivet a "quarter" — twenty-five years — on you. And there are people —
Chavdarov, for example — who know that during the war years the OSO even sentenced prisoners to
execution by shooting. Nothing unusual about this.

The OSO was nowhere mentioned in either the Constitution or the Code. However, it turned out to

be the most convenient kind of hamburger machine — easy to operate, undemanding, and requiring
no legal lubrication. The Code existed on its own, and the OSO existed on its own, and it kept on
deftly grinding without all the Code's 205 articles, neither invoking them nor even mentioning them.

As they used to joke in camp: "There is no court for nothing — for that there is an OSO."

Of course, the OSO itself also needed for convenience some kind of operational shorthand, but for
that purpose it worked out on its own a dozen "letter" articles which made operations very much
simpler. It wasn't necessary, when they were used, to cudgel your brains trying to make things fit the
formulations of the Code. And they were few enough to be easily remembered by a child. Some of
them we have already described:

ASA — Anti-Soviet Agitation

KRD — Counter-Revolutionary Activity

KRTD — Counter-Revolutionary Trotskyite Activity (And that "T" made the life of a zek in camp



much harder.)

PSh — Suspicion of Espionage (Espionage that went beyond the bounds of suspicion was handed
over to a tribunal. )

SVPSh — Contacts Leading (!) to Suspicion of Espionage

KRM — Counter-Revolutionary Thought

VAS — Dissemination of Anti-Soviet Sentiments

SOE — Socially Dangerous Element

SVE — Socially Harmful Element

PD — Criminal Activity (a favorite accusation against former camp inmates if there was nothing else
to be used against them)

And then, finally, there was the very expansive category:

ChS — Member of a Family (of a person convicted under one of the foregoing "letter" categories)

It has to be remembered that these categories were not applied uniformly and equally among
different groups and in different years. But, as with the articles of the Code and the sections in
special decrees, they broke out in sudden epidemics.

There is one more qualification. The OSO did not claim to be handing down a sentence. It did not
sentence a person but, instead, imposed an administrative penalty. And that was the whole thing in a
nutshell. Therefore it was, of course, natural for it to have juridical independence!

But even though they did not claim that the administrative penalty was a court sentence, it could be
up to twenty-five years and include:

• Deprivation of titles, ranks, and decorations

• Confiscation of all property

• Imprisonment

• Deprivation of the right to correspond

Thus a person could disappear from the face of the earth with the help of the OSO even more
reliably than under the terms of some primitive court sentence.

The OSO enjoyed another important advantage in that its penalty could not be appealed. There was
nowhere to appeal to. There was no appeals jurisdiction above it, and no jurisdiction beneath it. It
was subordinate only to the Minister of Internal Affairs, to Stalin, and to Satan.

Another big advantage the OSO had was speed. This speed was limited only by the technology of
typewriting.

And, last but not least, not only did the OSO not have to confront the accused face to face, which
lessened the burden on inter-prison transport: it didn't even have to have his photograph. At a time
when the prisons were badly overcrowded, this was a great additional advantage because the
prisoner did not have to take up space on the prison floor, or eat free bread once his interrogation had
been completed. He could be sent off to camp immediately and put to honest work. The copy of the
sentence could be read to him much later.

It used to be that in favorable conditions the prisoners were unloaded from freight cars at their
destinations. And they were made to kneel down right there, next to the tracks — as a pre-caution
against attempted escape. But it looked as if they were praying to the OSO. And then and there their
sentences were read out to them. It could also happen differently. In 1938 those who arrived at
Perebory on prisoner transports did not know either their Code articles or their sentences, but the
clerk who met them knew, and he looked them up on the list: SVE — Socially Harmful Element —



five years. That was during the time when there was an urgent need for many hands to work on the
Moscow- Volga Canal.

Others worked in the camps for months without knowing their sentences. After this, as I. Dobryak
reported, they were solemnly lined up — and not just on any old day, but on May 1, 1938, when the
red flags were flying — and the Stalino Province Troika's sentences were announced. (This would
indicate that the OSO did get decentralized in times of heavy load.) These sentences were from ten to
twenty years apiece. And in that same year, my former camp foreman, Sinebryukhov, was sent off
with a whole trainload of uasentenced prisoners from Chelyabinsk to Cherepovets. Months passed
and the zeks worked away. And then one rest day in winter (Note the days? Another advantage of
the OSO), when the frost was cracking, they were driven out into the courtyard and lined up. A
newly arrived lieutenant appeared and introduced himself as having come to inform them of their
OSO penalties. But he turned out to be a decent sort because he squinted at their thin footwear and at
the sun's rays in the steaming frost and said:

"Well anyway, men, why should you freeze out here? The OSO gave you all ten years apiece. There
are just a very, very few who got eight. You understand? Disssperse!"

But in view of the frankly mechanical operation of the Special Board, why have any courts at all?
Why use a horsecar when there's a noiseless modem streetcar available, which no one can jump out
of? Is it a matter of keeping the judges well fed?

Still, it is really quite indecent for a democratic state not to have courts. In 1919, the Eighth Congress
of the Party proclaimed in its program: Efforts must be made to involve all the working population in
the exercise of judicial duties. It did not prove possible to involve "all" the working population.
Conducting a trial is a delicate business. But there was no question of getting along entirely without
courts.

However, our political courts — the special collegia of provincial courts, the military tribunals (and
why, actually, should there be military tribunals in peacetime anyway?), and all the supreme courts
too — unanimously followed the path of the OSO. They, too, did not get stuck in the mud of public
trials or in arguments between sides.

Their primary and principal distinguishing feature was closed doors. They were first of all closed
courts — for their own convenience.

And by now we have become so accustomed to the fact that millions and millions of people were
tried in closed sessions and have become used to this for so long that now and then some mixed-up
son, brother, or nephew of a prisoner will even snort at you with conviction: "And what would you
have wanted? . . .

There's information here. Our enemies will find out! You can't do it!"

Thus the fear that our "enemies will find out" makes us clamp our head between our own knees.

Who in our Fatherland, except some bookworms, remembers now that Karakozov, who fired at the
Tsar, was provided with a defense lawyer? Or that Zhelyabov and all the Narodnaya Volya group
were tried in public, without any fear that the "Turks would find out"? Or that Vera Zasulich, who
attempted to kill the official who was, translated into Soviet terms, the Chief of the Moscow
Administration of the MVD — although she missed, and the bullet went past his head — not only was
not destroyed in a torture chamber but was acquitted in open court by a jury — no Troika — and then
went off in triumph in a carriage?

Despite these comparisons, I do not at all mean to say that a perfect system of courts and justice ever
existed in Russia. In all probability, an excellent judicial system is the last fruit of the most mature



society, or else one needs a Solomon. Vladimir Dal notes that in the period before the emancipation
of the serfs Russia had "not one single proverb containing any praise of the courts." And that really
means something. It seems likely that they never had time to get around to making up a proverb
praising the zemstvo chiefs either. But, nevertheless, the judicial reform of 1864 at least set the urban
sector of our society on the road toward those English models which Herzen praised so highly.

Saying all this, I still have not forgotten what Dostoyevsky had to say in his Diary of a Writer
against our trials by jury: about the excesses of some lawyers' eloquence ("Gentlemen of the jury!
What kind of woman would she have been if she had not stabbed her rival? Gentlemen of the jury!
Who among you would not have thrown the child out of the window?"); and the risk that a juror's
momentary impulse might outweigh his civic responsibility. But spiritually Dostoyevsky far
outstripped the realities of our life, and he worried about what he shouldn't have worried about! He
believed that we had achieved open trials once and for all! (Indeed, who among his contemporaries
could have believed in the OSO?) And somewhere else he writes: "It is better to err on the side of
mercy than on that of the death penalty." Oh, yes, yes, yes!

Excesses of eloquence do not afflict exclusively a judicial system in process of being established;
even more conspicuously, they afflict an already established democracy that has not yet discovered
its moral goals. England again gives us examples, as when, for partisan advantage, the leader of the
opposition does not hesitate to blame the government for a national predicament worse than actually
exists.

Excesses of eloquence are a malady. But what word can we then use for the excessive use of closed
doors? Dostoyevsky dreamed of a court in which everything essential to the defense of the accused
would be set forth by the prosecutor. How many aeons will we have to wait for that? Our social
experience has so far enriched us immeasurably with defense lawyers who accuse the defendant.
("As an honest Soviet person, as a true patriot, I cannot but feel repugnance at the disclosure of these
evil deeds.")

And how comfortable it all is for the judges in a closed session! Judicial robes are not required and
one can even roll up one's sleeves. How easy it is to work! There are no public-address systems, no
newspapermen, and no public. (Well, there is a public, an audience, but it consists of interrogators.
For example, they used to attend the Leningrad Province Court during the day to find out how their
"proteges" were conducting themselves, and at night went calhng on those prisoners who needed to
have their consciences appealed to.)3

The second main characteristic of our political courts is the lack of ambiguity in their work, which is
to say predetermined verdicts.

[That same collection edited by A. Y. Vyshinsky, Ot Tyurem k Vospitatelnym Uchrezhdeniyam,
includes materials indicating that the predetermination of verdicts is an old, old story. In 1924-1929,
sentences were determined by joint administrative and economic considerations. Beginning in 1924,
because of national unemployment, the courts reduced the number of verdicts which sentenced
prisoners to corrective labor while they continued to live at home and increased short-term prison
sentences. These cases involved only nonpolitical offenders, of course. As a result, prisons were
overcrowded with short-termers serving sentences of up to six months, and not enough use was
being made of them in labor colonies. At the beginning of 1929, the People's Commissariat of
Justice of the U.S.S.R., in Circular No. 5, condemned short-term sentences and, on November 6,
1929, the eve of the twelfth anniversary of the October Revolution, when the country was
supposedly entering on the construction of socialism, a decree of the Central Executive Committee
and the Council of People's Commissars smvply forbade all sentences of less than one year!]

In other words, you, a judge, always know what the higher-ups expect of you (furthermore there's a
telephone if you still have any doubts). And, following the example of the OSO's, sentences might



even be typed out ahead of time, with only the prisoner's name to be added later, by hand. And in
1942 Strakhovich cried out during a session of the military tribunal of the Leningrad Military
District: "But I could not have been recruited by Ignatovsky when I was only ten years old!" But the
presiding judge barked back: "Don't slander the Soviet intelligence service!" The whole thing had
been predetermined long before: each and every one of the Ignatovsky group was to be sentenced to
be shot. Some man named Lipov got included in the group, but no one from the group knew him and
he knew none of them either. Well, so, all right, Lipov got ten years.

How hugely the predetermination of sentences contributed to easing the thorny life of a judge. It
wasn't so much a mental relief, in the sense that one didn't have to think, as it was a moral relief. You
didn't have to torture yourself with worry that you might make a mistake in a sentence and make
orphans out of your own little children. And the predetermination of sentences could dispose even so
immovable a judge as Ulrikh to good humor, (And what major execution had he not pronounced?) In
1945, the Military Collegium was hearing the case of the "Estonian separatists." Short, stocky, good-
humored Ulrikh was presiding. He didn't pass up a single opportunity to joke not only with his
colleagues but also with the prisoners. (After all, that's what humaneness is! A new trait — where had
it ever been seen?) Having learned that Susi was a lawyer, he said to him with a smile: "Well, so
now your profession can be of some use to you!" Well, there is no need to quarrel. Why be
embittered? The court routine proceeded pleasantly. They smoked right at the judge's table, and at a
convenient moment broke off for a good lunch. And when evening began to fall, they had to go and
confer. But who confers at night? They left the prisoners to sit at their desks all night long and went
on home. At nine in the morning they came in all brisk and freshly shaved: "Rise. The court is in
session." And all the prisoners were given a "ten-ruble bill" apiece.

And if anyone should object that the OSO at least proceeded without hypocrisy, whereas there was
hypocrisy in instances like the above — they pretended to be conferring but didn't really confer — we
would certainly have to enter a strong — very strong — dissent!

Well, the third and final characteristic is dialectics. (Which used to be crudely described in the folk
saying: "Whichever way you point a wagon tongue, that's the way it goes.") The Code cannot be a
dead weight in the path of the judge. The articles of the Code had been around during ten, fifteen,
twenty years of rapid change, and, just as Faust said:

The whole world changes and everything moves forward, And why should I be afraid to break
my word?

All the articles of the Code had become encrusted with interpretations, directions, instructions. And
if the actions of the accused are not covered by the Code, he can still be convicted:

• By analogy (What opportunities!)

• Simply because of origins (7-35: belonging to a socially dangerous milieu)

[In the Republic of South Africa, terror has gone to such lengths in recent years that every suspicious
(SOE — Socially Dangerous Element) black can be arrested and held for three months without
investigation or trial. Anyone can see immediately the flimsiness of this: why not from three to ten
years?]

• For contacts with dangerous persons (Here's scope for you! Who is "dangerous" and what
"contacts" consist of only the judge can say.)

[This is something we hadn't known, something the newspaper hvestiya told us in July, 1957.]

But one should not complain about the precise wording of our published laws either. On January 13,
1950, a decree was issued re-establishing capital punishment. (One is bound, of course, to consider



that capital punishment never did depart from Beria's cellars.) And the decree stated that the death
sentence could be imposed on subversives — diversionists. What did that mean? It didn't say. losif
Vissarionovich loved it that way: not to say all of it, just to hint. Did it refer only to someone who
blew up rails with TNT? It didn't say. We had long since come to know what a "diversionist" was:
someone who produced goods of poor quality was a diversionist. But what was a subversive? Was
someone subverting the authority of the government, for example, in a conversation on a streetcar?
Or if a girl married a foreigner — wasn't she subverting the majesty of our Motherland?

But it is not the judge who judges. The judge only takes his pay. The directives did the judging. The
directive of 1937: ten years; twenty years; execution by shooting. The directive of 1943: twenty
years at hard labor; hanging. The directive of 1945: ten years for everyone, plus five of
disenfranchisement (manpower for three Five- Year Plans).

[Babayev, in fact a nonpolitical, shouted at them: "You can 'muzzle' me for three hundred years! But
I'll never lift my hand for you, you benefactors!"]

The directive of 1949: everyone gets twenty-five.

[Thus it was that a real spy (Schultz, in Berlin, in 1948) could get ten years, and someone who had
never been a spy, Gunther Waschkau, got twenty-five. Because he was in the wave of 1949.]

The machine stamped out the sentences. The prisoner had already been deprived of all rights when
they cut off his buttons on the threshold of State Security, and he couldn't avoid a stretch. The
members of the legal profession were so used to this that they fell on their faces in 1958 and caused a
big scandal. The text of the projected new "Fundamental Principles of Criminal Prosecution of the
U.S.S.R." was published in the newspapers, and they'd forgotten to include any reference to possible
grounds for acquittal. The government newspaper issued a mild rebuke:

"The impression might be created that our courts only bring in convictions."

But just take the jurists' side for a moment: why, in fact, should a trial be supposed to have two
possible outcomes when our general elections are conducted on the basis of one candidate? An
acquittal is, in fact, unthinkable from the economic point of view! It would mean that the informers,
the Security officers, the interrogators, the prosecutor's staff, the internal guard in the prison, and the
convoy had all worked to no purpose.

Here is one straightforward and typical case that was brought before a military tribunal. In 1941, the
Security operations branch of our inactive army stationed in Mongolia was called on to show its
activity and vigilance. The military medical assistant Lozovsky, who was jealous of Lieutenant Pavel
Chulpenyev because of some woman, realized this. He addressed three questions to Chulpenyev
when they were alone:

1. "Why, in your opinion, are we retreating from the Germans?" (Chulpenyev's reply: "They have
more equipment and they were mobilized earlier." Lozovsky's counter: "No, it's a maneuver. We're
decoying them.")

2. "Do you believe the Allies will help?" (Chulpenyev: "I believe they'll help, but not from unselfish
motives." Lozovsky's counter: "They are deceiving us. They won't help us at all.")

3. "Why was Voroshilov sent to command the Northwest Front?"

Chulpenyev answered and forgot about them. And Lozovsky wrote a denunciation. Chulpenyev was
summoned before the Political Branch of the division and expelled from the Komsomol: for a
defeatist attitude, for praising German equipment, for beUttling the strategy of our High Command.



The loudest voice raised against him belonged to the Komsomol organizer Kalyagin, who had
behaved like a coward at the battle of Khalkhin-Gol, in Chulpenyev's presence, and therefore found
it convenient to get rid of the witness once and for all.

Chulpenyev's arrest followed. He had one confrontation with Lozovsky. Their previous conversation
was not even brought up by the interrogator. One question was asked: "Do you know this man?"
"Yes." "Witness, you may leave." (The interrogator was afraid the charge might fall through.)

[Today Lozovsky holds the degree of candidate in medical sciences and lives in Moscow.
Everything is going well with him. Chulpenyev drives a trolley bus.]

Depressed by his month's incarceration in the sort of hole in the ground we have already described,
Chulpenyev appeared before a military tribunal of the 36th Motorized Division. Present were
Lebedev, the Divisional Political Commissar, and Slesarev, the Chief of the Political Branch. The
witness Lozovsky was not even summoned to testify. However, after the trial, to document the false
testimony, they got Lozovsky's signature and that of Political Commissar Seryegin. The questions
the tribunal asked were: Did you have a conversation with Lozovsky? What did he ask you about?
What were your answers? Naively, Chulpenyev told them. He still couldn't understand what he was
guilty of. "After all, many people talk like that!" he innocently exclaimed. The tribunal was
interested: "Who? Give us their names." But Chulpenyev was not of their breed! He had the last
word. "I beg the court to give me an assignment that will mean my death so as to assure itself once
more of my patriotism" — and, like a simplehearted warrior of old — "Me and the person who
slandered me — both of us together."

Oh, no! Our job is to kill off all those chivalrous sentiments in the people. Lozovsky's duty was to
hand out pills and Seryegin's duty was to indoctrinate the soldiers.

[Viktor Andreyevich Seryegin lives in Moscow today and works in a Consumer Service Combine
attached to the Moscow Soviet. He lives well.]

Whether or not you died wasn't important. What was important was that we were on guard. The
members of the military tribunal went out, had a smoke and returned: ten years plus three years'
disenfranchisement.

There were certainly more than ten such cases in every division during the war. (Otherwise, the
military tribunals would not have justified the cost of maintaining them.) And how many divisions
were there in all? Let the reader count them up himself.

The sessions of the military tribunals were depressingly like one another. The judges were
depressingly faceless and emotionless — rubber stamps. The sentences all came off the same
assembly line.

Everyone maintained a serious mien, but everyone understood it was a farce, above all the boys of
the convoy, who were the simplest sort of fellows. At the Novosibirsk Transit Prison in 1945 they
greeted the prisoners with a roll call based on cases. "So and so! Article 58-la, twenty-five years."
The chief of the convoy guard was curious: "What did you get it for?" "For nothing at all." "You're
lying. The sentence for nothing at all is ten years."

When the military tribunals were under pressure, their "sessions" lasted one minute — the time it took
them to go out and come in again. When their working day went on for sixteen consecutive hours,
one could see, through the door of the conference room, bowls of fruit on a table set with a white
tablecloth. If they weren't in a hurry, they enjoyed delivering their sentence "with a psychological
twist": "... sentenced to the supreme measure of punishment!" And then a pause. The judges would
look the condemned man in the eye. It was interesting to see how he took it. What was he feeling at



that moment? Only then would the verdict continue: "... but taking into consideration the sincere
repentance ..."

On the walls of the waiting room messages had been scratched with nails and scrawled in pencil: "I
got execution," "I got twenty-five," "I got a 'tenner!' " They didn't clean off these graffiti; they served
an educational purpose. Be scared; bow down; don't think that you can change anything by your
behavior. Even if you were to speak in your own defense with the eloquence of Demosthenes, in a
hall empty except for a handful of interrogators — like Olga Sliozberg in 1936, at the Supreme
Court — it would not help you in the slightest. All you could do would be to increase your sentence
from ten years to execution. For instance, if you were to shout: "You are fascists! I am ashamed to
have been a member of your Party for several years!" (Nikolai Semyonovich Daskal did it in 1937,
at the Special Collegium of the Azov-Black Sea Province at Maikop, presided over by Kholik.) In
that situation what they did was fabricate a new case and do you in once and for all.

Chavdarov has described an incident in which the accused suddenly repudiated at their trial all the
false testimony they had given during the interrogation. And what happened? If there was any
hesitation while glances were exchanged, it lasted no more than a few seconds. The prosecutor asked
for a recess, without explaining why. The interrogators and their tough-boy helpers dashed in from
the interrogation prison. All the prisoners, distributed among separate boxes, were given a good
beating all over again and promised another after the next recess. The recess came to an end. Once
again the judges questioned all of them — and this time they all confessed.

Aleksandr Grigoryevich Karetnikov, the Director of the Textile Research Institute, provided an
example of outstanding astuteness. Just before the session of the Military Collegium of the Supreme
Court was to begin, he sent word through the guard that he wanted to give supplementary testimony.
This, of course, provoked curiosity. He was received by the prosecutor. Karetnikov displayed his
infected collarbone, broken by the interrogator who had struck him with a stool, and declared: "I
signed everything under torture." By this time the prosecutor was cursing himself for having been so
greedy to get "supplementary" testimony, but it was too late. Each of them is fearless only as long as
he is an anonymous cog in the whole machine. But just as soon as the responsibility has become
personalized, individualized, concentrated on him, just as soon as the searchlight is on him, he grows
pale and realizes that he is nothing and can slip on any chance banana peel. So Karetnikov caught the
prosecutor, and the latter was unwilling to suppress the whole business. The session of the Military
Collegium began and Karetnikov repeated his statement in front of them. Now there was a case in
which the Military Collegium went out and really conferred! But the only verdict they could have
brought in was acquittal, which would have meant releasing Karetnikov on the spot. Therefore they
brought in no verdict at all!

As if nothing at all had happened, they took Karetnikov back to prison, treated his collarbone, and
kept him another three months. A very polite new interrogator entered the case, who wrote out a new
warrant for Karetnikov's arrest. (If the Collegium had not twisted things, he might at least have spent
those three months as a free man.) The interrogator asked the same questions as the first interrogator.
Karetnikov, sensing freedom in the offing, conducted himself staunchly and refused to admit any
guilt whatever. And what happened next? He got eight years from an OSO.

This example shows well enough the possibilities available to the prisoner and the possibilities
available to the OSO. It was the poet Derzhavin who wrote:

A partial court is worse than banditry.
Judges are enemies; there sleeps the law.
In front of you the citizen's neck
Lies stretched out, quiet and without defense.

But it was a rare thing for such accidents to take place in the Military Collegium of the Supreme



Court. For that matter, it was in general rare for it to rub clear its clouded eyes and take a look at any
individual little tin soldier of a prisoner. In 1937, A.D.R., an electrical engineer, was taken up to the
fourth floor, running upstairs with a convoy guard on either side of him. (In all probability, the
elevator was working, but there were so many prisoners pouring in and out that the officials and
employees would not have been able to use the elevator if the prisoners had been permitted to.)
Meeting a convicted prisoner who had just left, they dashed into the court. The Military Collegium
was in such a hurry they hadn't sat down yet, and all three members remained standing. Catching his
breath with difficulty, for he had been weakened by his long interrogation, R. blurted out his full
name. They muttered something, exchanged glances, and Ulrikh — the very same, no less —
proclaimed: "Twenty years!" And they dragged R. out at a gallop and, at a gallop, dragged in the
next prisoner.

It was all like a dream. In February, 1963, 1, too, got to climb those stairs, but I was courteously
accompanied by a colonel who was also a Communist Party organizer. And in that room with the
circular colonnade, in which, they say, the Plenary Sessions of the Supreme Court of the U.S.S.R.
meet — with an enormous horseshoelike table that had another round table inside it and seven antique
chairs — seventy officials of the Military Collegium heard me out — that same Military Collegium
which once sentenced Karetnikov, and R. and others and others, and so on and so forth. And I said to
them: "What a remarkable day this is! Although I was first sentenced to camp and then to eternal
exile, I never before saw a single judge face to face. And now I see all of you assembled here
together!" (And they, rubbing their eyes open, for the first time saw a living zek.)

But it turned out that it had not been they! Yes. They said it had not been they. They assured me that
those others were no longer present. Some had retired honorably on pensions. A few had been
removed. (Ulrikh, the outstanding executioner of all, had been removed, it turned out, back in
Stalin's time, in 1950, for, believe it or not, leniency.) Some of them — there were only a few of
these — had even been tried under Khrushchev, and, in their role as defendants, they had threatened:
"Today you are trying us. Tomorrow we will try you. Watch out!" But like all the starts made under
Khrushchev, this effort, too, which had been very active at first, was soon abandoned. He dropped it
before it got far enough to produce an irreversible change; which meant that things were left where
they had been.

On that occasion, several veterans of the bench, all speaking up at the same time, gave voice to their
recollections, unwittingly providing me with material for this chapter. (Oh, if only they had
undertaken to remember and to publish! But the years pass; another five have gone by; and it has not
become any brighter or lighter.) They recalled how certain judges, at conferences of their judicial
colleagues, took pride when they spoke from the rostrum of having succeeded in not applying Article
51 of the Criminal Code, which specifies those circumstances that extenuate guilt, and thus had
succeeded in handing down sentences of twenty-five years instead of ten. And how the courts had
been humiliatingly subservient to the Organs. A certain judge was trying a case. A Soviet citizen
who had returned from the United States had made the slanderous statement that there were good
automobile roads in America — and nothing else. That was all there was to the case.

The judge ventured to send the case back for further investigation /or the purpose of getting
"genuine anti-Soviet materials" - in other words, so that the accused could be beaten and tortured.

But his praiseworthy intention wasn't taken into account. The angry answer came back: "You mean
you don't trust our Organs?" And, in the upshot, the judge was exiled to the post of secretary of a
military tribunal on Sakhalin! (Under Khrushchev, reproof was not so severe; judges who "made
mistakes" were sent — where do you think? — to work as lawyers. )

[ Izvestiya, June 9, 1964. This throws an interesting light on views of legal defense! In 1918, V. I.
Lenin demanded that judges who handed down sentences that were too lenient be excluded from the
Party.]



The prosecutor's office was just as subservient to the Organs. When, in 1942, Ryumin's flagrant
abuses in the counterintelligence section of the Northern Fleet became known, the prosecutor's office
did not dare interfere on its own, but only reported respectfully to Abakumov that his boys were
acting up. Abakumov had good reason to consider the Organs the salt of the earth! (This was the
occasion when he called in Ryumin and promoted him — to his own eventual undoing.)

There just wasn't enough time that February day, or they would have told me ten times as much as
they did. But this, too, provides food for thought. If both the courts and the prosecutor's office were
simply pawns of the Minister of State Security, then maybe there isn't any need for a separate chapter
to describe them.

They vied with each other in telling me things, and I kept looking around me in astonishment. They
were people! Real people! They were smiling! They were explaining that their intentions were of the
best. Well, and what if things turn full circle and it is once again up to them to try me? Maybe even
in that very hall — and they were showing me the main hall.

Well, so they will convict me.

Which comes first — the chicken or the egg? The people or the system?

For several centuries we had a proverb: "Don't fear the law, fear the judge."

But, in my opinion, the law has outstripped people, and people have lagged behind in cruelty. It is
time to reverse the proverb:
"Don't fear the judge, fear the law."

Abakumov's kind of law, of course.

They stepped onto the rostrum and talked about Ivan Denisovich. They said happily that the book
had eased their consciences (that's what they said . . .). They admitted that the picture I painted was
decidedly on the bright side, that every one of them knew of camps worse than that. (Ah, so they did
know?) Of the seventy people seated around that horseshoe, several turned out to be knowledgeable
in literature, even to be readers of Novy Mir. They were eager for reform. They spoke forcefully
about our social ulcers, about our neglect of our rural areas.

And I sat there and thought: If the first tiny droplet of truth has exploded like a psychological bomb,
what then will happen in our country when whole waterfalls of Truth burst forth?

And they will burst forth. It has to happen.

Chapter 8

The Law as a Child

We forget everything. What we remember is not what actually happened, not history, but merely that
hackneyed dotted line they have chosen to drive into our memories by incessant ham- mering.

I do not know whether this is a trait common to all mankind, but it is certainly a trait of our people.
And it is a vexing one. It may have its source in goodness, but it is vexing nonetheless. It makes us
an easy prey for liars.

Therefore, if they demand that we forget even the public trials, we forget them. The proceedings

were open and were reported in our newspapers, but they didn't drill a hole in our brains to make us
remember — and so we've forgotten them. Only things repeated on the radio day after day drill holes



in the brain. I am not even talking about young people, since they, of course, know nothing of all
this, but about people who were alive at the time of those trials. Ask any middle-aged person to
enumerate the highly publicized open trials. He will remember those of Bukharin and Zinoviev. And,
knitting his brow, that of the Promparty too. And that's all. There were no other public trials.

Yet in actual fact they began right after the October Revolu- tion. In 1918, quantities of them were
taking place, in many dif- ferent tribunals. They were taking place before there were either laws or
codes, when the judges had to be guided solely by the requirements of the revolutionary workers' and
peasants' power. At the same time, they were regarded as blazing their own trail of bold legality.
Their detailed history will someday be written by someone, and it's not for us even to attempt to
include it in our present investigation.

However, we cannot do without a brief review. It is our duty, anyway, to probe some of the charred
ruins which go all the way back to that gentle, misty, rose-colored dawn.

In those dynamic years, the sabers of war were not rusting in their scabbards, nor did the
executioners' revolvers have time to grow cold in their holsters. Only later on did the custom de-
velop of hiding executions in cellars under cover of night and of shooting the victims in the back of
the head. In 1918, the famous Ryazan Chekist Stelmakh had those sentenced to death shot in the
courtyard, during the day, so that prisoners awaiting execu- tion could watch from the prison
windows.

There was an official term current then: extrajudicial reprisal . . . not because there weren't any
courts at the time, but because there was the Cheka.

[This fledgling whose beak had not yet hardened was warmed and encour- aged by Trotsky: "Terror
is a powerful means of policy and one would have to be a hypocrite not to understand this." And
Zinoviev rejoiced too, not yet fore- seeing his own end: "The letters GPU, like the letters VChK, are
the most popular in the world."]

Because it was more efficient. Certainly, there were courts, and they tried and convicted and
executed people, but we need to remember that, parallel to them and inde- pendently of them,
extrajudicial reprisal went on at the same time. How can one depict its scale? M. Latsis, in his
popular review of the Cheka's activity, gives us material for only a year and a half (1918 and half of
1919 ) and for only twenty provinces of Central Russia ("The figures presented here are far from
com- plete," in part, perhaps, out of modesty): those shot by the Cheka (i.e., without trial, bypassing
the courts) numbered 8,389 persons (eight thousand three hundred and eighty-nine); coun-
terrevolutionary organizations uncovered — 412 (a fantastic fig- ure, in view of our inadequate
capacity for organization throughout our history and also the general isolation of indi- viduals in
those years and the general psychological depression); the total of those arrested — 87,000 (and this
figure smells of understatement).

What comparison is available for purposes of evaluation? In 1907 a group of leftist leaders published
a collection of essays entitled Against Capital Punishment, in which are listed by name all those
sentenced to death in Tsarist Russia from 1826 to 1906. The editors qualify their findings with the
statement that there were some additional victims, whose names remain un- known, and that the Ust
is incomplete. (However, it is certainly not so incomplete as Latsis' materials compiled during the
Civil War.) The Ust totals 1,397 — from which 233 persons have to be deducted because their death
sentences were commuted, as do an additional 270, who were sentenced in absentia and never
caught (for the most part Polish rebels who had fled to the West). That leaves 894, a figure covering
eighty years, which is not even close to Latsis' total for only one and a half years, and not including
all the provinces of Russia either. True, the editors of the collection cite another presumed statistic of
1,310 for those sentenced to death (although perhaps not executed) in 1906 alone, and a total of
3,419 for 1826 through 1906. But this, mind you, was right in the midst of the notorious Stolypin



reaction, a period for which an additional figure is available: 950 executions over a period of six
months. (In fact, the Stolypin military field tribunals were in existence for six months all told.) It
sounds awful, and yet it does not make much of an impression on our hardened nerves: even if we
multiply by three this figure of 950 for six months, in order to compare it with the Latsis figure for
eighteen months in the postrevolutionary period, we still come up with the fact that the terror after
the Revolution was at least three times more in- tense than Stolypin's. And that was for just twenty
provinces and excluded courts and tribunals.

And from November, 1917, on, the courts acted on their own. Despite all the difficulties at the time.
Guiding Principles of the Criminal Law of the R.S.F.S.R. were issued for their use in 1919. (We have
not read this work, could not obtain it, and know only that it included "imprisonment for an
indefinite term" — in other words, pending a special order.)

The courts were of three kinds: the people's courts, the circuit courts, and the Revolutionary
Tribunals — the Revtribunals.

The people's courts handled ordinary misdemeanors and non- political criminal cases. They were not
empowered to impose death sentences, and, laughable as it seems, the people's court could not, in
fact, impose sentences exceeding two years. Up to July, 1918, the heritage of the Left SR's still
endured in our ju- dicial proceedings. Only by special intervention of the govern- ment and only
individually were impermissibly lenient sentences raised to twenty years.

[See Part III, Chapter 1.]

From July, 1918, on, the people's courts were given the right to hand down sentences of up to five
years. And in 1922, when all threats of war had died down, the people's courts got the right to
impose sentences of up to ten years and lost the right to sentence anyone to less than six months.

From the beginning, the circuit courts and the Revtribunals had the power to impose the death
sentence, but they lost it for a brief period: the circuit courts in 1920, and the Revtribunals in 1921.
There were many tiny ups and downs in this period which only a historian pursuing all the details of
those years would be able to trace.

Perhaps that historian will seek out the documents and un- roll for us the scroll of tribunal sentences
and also the statistics. (Though probably not. Whatever time and events failed to destroy was
destroyed by persons interested in having such ma- terial disappear.) We know only that the
Revtribunals were not asleep. They were handing down sentences right and left. And we know, too,
that every time a city was captured during the Civil War the event was marked not only by
gunsmoke in the court- yards of the Cheka, but also by sleepless sessions of the tribunal. And you
did not have to be a White officer, a senator, a land- owner, a monk, a Cadet, an SR, or an Anarchist
in order to get your bullet. Soft white uncallused hands alone were sufficient in. those years. But one
can also hazard the guess that in Izhevsk or Votkinsk, Yaroslavl or Murom, Kozlov or Tambov, the
uprisings were very costly as well to those who had callused workers' hands. And if those scrolls — of
both the extrajudicial executions and those by tribunal — are unrolled for us someday, the most
surpris- ing thing will be the number of ordinary peasants we find on them. Because there was no
end to the number of peasant up- risings and revolts from 1918 to 1921, even though they did not
adorn the colored pages of the official History of the Civil War, and even though no one
photographed them, and no one filmed motion pictures of those furious crowds attacking machine
guns with clubs, pitchforks, and axes and, later, lined up for execution with their arms tied behind
their backs — ten for one! The revolt in Sapozhok is remembered only in Sapozhok; the one in
Pitelino only in Pitelino. We learn from Latsis the number of peasant rebellions that were suppressed
during that same year and a half in twenty provinces — 344. (From 1918 on, peasant revolts were
already being called "kulak" revolts, for how could the peasants revolt against the workers' and
peasants' power! But how then could one explain that in every instance it was not just three peasant



huts that revoked but the whole village? Why did the masses of poor peasants not kill the insurgent
"kulaks" with those same pitchforks and axes, instead of marching with them against the machine
guns? Latsis claims: "The kulaks compelled the rest of the peasants to take part in these revolts by
promises, slander, and threats." But what could have been more laden with promises than the slogans
of the Committees of the Poor? And what could have been more loaded with threats than the
machine guns of the Special Purpose Detachments, the CHON?

And how many wholly random people, completely random, whose destruction inevitably accounts
for half the casualties of every real, shooting revolution, were caught between those mill- stones?

Here is an eyewitness description of a session of the Ryazan Revtribunal which met in 1919 to hear
the case of the Tolstoyan I. Ye v.

With the proclamation of universal and compulsory conscrip- tion into the Red Army (just one year
after the slogans: "Down with the wan"; "Stick your bayonets in the ground!"; "Go home!"), "54,697
deserters were caught and sent to the front" by September, 1919, in Ryazan Province alone. (And

how many others were shot on the spot as examples?) Ye v was not a deserter at all but a man

who simply and openly refused to enter military service because of his religious convictions. He was
con- scripted by main force, but in the barracks he refused to take up arms or undergo training. The
enraged Political Commissar of the unit turned him over to the Cheka, saying: "He does not
recognize the Soviet government." There was an interrogation. Three Chekists sat behind the desk,
each with a Naguan revolver in front of him. "We have seen heroes like you before. You'll be on

your knees to us in a minute! Either agree to fight immediately, or we'll shoot you!" But Ye- v

was firm. He couldn't fight. He was a believer in free Christianity. And his case was sent to the
Revtribunal.

It was an open session, with a hundred spectators in the hall. There was a polite elderly defense
lawyer. The learned "accuser" — the term "prosecutor" was forbidden until 1922 — was Nikol- sky,
another old jurist. One of the members of the Revtribunal — a juror — tried to elicit the views of the
accused. (How can you, a representative of the working people, share the opinions of the aristocrat
Count Tolstoi?) But the presiding judge in- terrupted the questioning and refused to permit it to
continue. There was a quarrel.

Juror: "You do not want to kill people, and you try to persuade others to refrain from killing. But the
Whites began the war, and you are preventing us from defending ourselves. We will send you to
Kolchak, and you can preach your nonresistance there!"

Ye v: "I will go wherever you send me."

Accuser: "This tribunal is not supposed to concern itself with any nondescript criminal actions but
only with those which are counterrevolutionary. In view of the nature of this crime, I demand that
the case be turned over to a people's court."

Presiding Judge: "Ha! Actions! What a pettifogger you are! We are guided not by the laws but by
our revolutionary conscience!"

Accuser: "I insist that you include my demand in the record."

Defense Attorney: "I support the accuser. The case should be heard in an ordinary court."

Presiding Judge: "There's an old fool for you! Where did they manage to find him?"

Defense Attorney: "I have been a practicing lawyer for forty years and this is the first time I have
heard such an insult. Enter it in the record."



Presiding Judge (laughing): "We'll enter it, we'll enter it!" Laughter in the hall. The court exits in
order to confer. The sounds of a noisy argument come from the conference room.

They return with the sentence: to be shot.

Loud indignation in the hall.

Accuser: "I protest against the sentence and will complain to the Commissariat of Justice!"
Defense Lawyer: "I join my voice to that of the accuser."
Presiding Judge: "Clear the hall!"

The convoy came and led Ye v to jail, saying to him: "If everyone was like you, brother, how

good it would be! There would be no war, and no Whites and no Reds!" They went back to their
barracks and called a Red Army meeting. It condemned the sentence and sent a protest to Moscow.

In daily expectation of death. Ye v waited for thirty-seven days, while, from the prison window,

he watched executions taking place. They commuted his sentence to fifteen years of strict detention.

This is an instructive example. Although "revolutionary legal- ity" won a partial victory, how
enormous an effort it required on the part of the presiding judge! How much disorganization, lack of
discipline, lack of political consciousness there still was! The prosecution stood firmly with the
defense. The convoy guards stuck their noses into something that wasn't their business in order to
send off a protest. Whew, the dictatorship of the prole- tariat and the new kind of court were not
having things easy by any means! Of course, not all the sessions were anything like so turbulent, but
this wasn't the only one of its kind. How many years it would take to reveal, direct, and confirm the
necessary line, until the defense would stand as one with the prosecution and the court, and the
accused would be in agreement with them too, and all the resolutions of the workers as well!

To pursue this enterprise of many years' duration is the re- warding task of the historian. As for us —
how are we to make our way through that rosy mist? Whom are we to ask about it? Those who were
shot aren't talking, and neither are those who have been scattered to the four winds. Even if the
defendants, and the lawyers, and the guards, and the spectators have survived, no one will allow us
to seek them out.

Evidently, the only help we will get is from the prosecution.

In this connection, I was given by well-wishers an intact copy of a collection of speeches for the
prosecution delivered by that fierce revolutionary, the first People's Commissar of Military Affairs in
the Workers' and Peasants' Government, the Com- mander in Chief, and later the organizer of the
Department of Exceptional Courts of the People's Commissariat of Justice — where the personal rank
of tribune was being readied for him, until Lenin vetoed the title — the glorious accuser in the
greatest trials, subsequently exposed as the ferocious enemy of the people, N. V. Krylenko.

[Krylenko, Za Pyat Let (1918-1922). Edition 7,000 copies. Prose- cution speeches in the most
important trials held before the Moscow and the Supreme Revolutionary Tribunals.]

And if, despite everything, we want to at- tempt a brief review of the public trials, if we are
determined to try to get a feeling for the judicial atmosphere of the first post- revolutionary years,
then we have to learn to read this Krylenko text. We have no other. And using it as a basis, we must
try to picture to ourselves everything that is missing from it and every- thing that happened in the
provinces too.



Of course, we would prefer to see the stenographic record of those trials, to listen to the dramatic
voices from beyond the grave of those first defendants and those first lawyers, speaking at a time
when no one could have foreseen in what implacable sequence all of it would be swallowed up —
together with those Revtribunal members as well.

However, as Krylenko has explained, /or a whole series of technical reasons "it was inconvenient to
publish the stenographic records" It was convenient only to publish his speeches for the prosecution
and the sentences handed down by the tribunals, which by that time had already come to jibe
completely with the demands of the accuser-prosecutor.

Krylenko claims that the archives of the Moscow Revtribunal and the Supreme Revtribunal turned
out (by 1922) to be "far from orderly. ... In a whole series of cases the stenographic records . . . were
so incomprehensible that it was necessary either to cross out entire pages or else to try to restore the
text from memory" ! And a "series of the biggest trials" — including the trial which followed the
revolt of the Left SR's, and the case of Ad- mirai Shchastny — "were conducted entirely without
stenographic records."

This is strange. The condemnation of the Left SR's was not a trivial matter. It was, after the February
and October revolutions, the third turning point in our history, signaling the transition to a one-party
system in the state. Not a few of them were shot. And no stenographic record was made.

And the "Military Plot" of 1919 was "liquidated by the Cheka in an extrajudicial reprisal," which
"was further proof of its existence." (In this case more than one thousand people were arrested
altogether, and, really, how could trials have been set up for them all?)

So just try to produce a neat, orderly report on the trials of those years!

Nevertheless we can learn the important principles involved in them. For example, the supreme
accuser — in other words, the Prosecutor General — informs us that the AU-Russian Central Ex-
ecutive Committee had the right to intervene in any judicial pro- ceeding. "VTsIK pardons and
punishes, at its own discretion without any limitation whatever." For example, a six-month sentence
was changed to ten years. (And, as the reader under- stands, it was not necessary for the entire AU-
Russian Central Executive Committee to assemble at a plenary meeting to this end, since its
Chairman, Sverdlov, for example, could correct a sentence without leaving his office.) All of this,
Krylenko ex- plains, "shows the superiority of our system over the false theory of the separation of
powers," that is, the theory of the independ- ence of the judiciary. (True, Sverdlov also said: "It is
very good that the legislative and executive power are not divided by a thick wall as they are in the
West. All problems can be decided quickly." Especially on the phone.)

Krylenko formulated even more frankly and precisely the general tasks of the Soviet Courts in his
speeches before those tribunals, when the court was "at one and the same time both

the creator of the law [Krylenko's italics] . . . and a political weapon." (My italics.)

Creator of the law because, for four years, there were no codes. They had thrown out the Tsarist
codes, and they had not com- posed their own. "Don't tell me our criminal courts ought to act
exclusively on the basis of existing written norms. We live in the process of Revolution." "A tribunal
is not the kind of court in which fine points of jurisprudence and clever stratagems are to be restored.
. . . We are creating a new law and new ethical norms." And also: "No matter how much is said here
about the eternal law of truth, justice, etc., we know . . . how dearly these have cost us."

(But if your prison terms are compared with ours, maybe it didn't cost you so dearly after all? Maybe
eternal justice was somewhat more comfortable?)



The reason that fine points of jurisprudence are unnecessary is that there is no need to clarify
whether the defendant is guilty or not guilty: the concept of guilt is an old bourgeois concept which
has now been uprooted.

And so we heard from Comrade Krylenko that a tribunal was not that kind of court! On another
occasion we would hear from him that a tribunal was not a court at all: "A tribunal is an organ of the
class struggle of the workers directed against their enemies" and must act "from the point of view of
the interests of the revolu- tion . . . having in mind the most desirable results for the masses of
workers and peasants." People are not people, but "carriers of specific ideas." "No matter what the
individual qualities [of the defendant], only one method of evaluating him is to be applied:
evaluation from the point of view of class expediency."

In other words, you can exist only if it's expedient for the working class. And if "this expediency
should require that the avenging sword should fall on the head of the defendants, then no ... verbal
arguments can help." (Such as arguments by lawyers, etc.) "In our revolutionary court we are guided
not by articles of the law and not by the degree of extenuating circum- stances; in the tribunal we
must proceed on the basis of con- siderations of expediency."

That was the way it was in those years: people lived and breathed and then suddenly found out that
their existence was inexpedient.

And it must also be kept in mind that it was not what he had done that constituted the defendant's
burden, but what he might do if he were not shot now. "We protect ourselves not only against the
past but also against the future."

Comrade Krylenko's pronouncements are clear and all-inclu- sive. They bring alive for us that whole
period of the law in sharp relief. The clarity of autumn suddenly pierces the mists of spring and
reaches us. And is it perhaps unnecessary to go further? Perhaps we aren't required to page through
trial after trial. These pronouncements will be henceforth inexorably applied.

Close your eyes tight for a minute and picture a tiny court- room — not yet gilded. Earnest members
of the tribunal in simple field jackets, lean, not yet fat-faced. The accusing power — as Krylenko
loved to style himself — wears an unbuttoned civilian jacket, with a glimpse of a sailor's striped
undershirt just visible at the open throat.

The supreme accuser expresses himself in this sort of language: "The question of fact is interesting
to me!"; "Define concretely the aspect of the tendency!"; "We are operating on the plane of analysis
of objective truth." Sometimes, as you read, a quotation from the Latin shines out. (It is true that the
same quotation turns up in case after case, but, after several years, a different one does appear. ) And
no wonder — he did, after all, complete the course in two faculties despite all his revolutionary
running around. What attracts one to him are his frank opinions about the de- fendants: "Professional
scoundrels!" And he isn't hypocritical in the least. If he didn't like the defendant's smile, he didn't
hes- itate to blurt out a threat, even before any sentence was imposed.

"And as for you and your smile, Citizeness Ivanova, we'll make you pay for it, and we'll find a way
to fix it so that you never laugh again!"

So, shall we begin?

A. The Case of "Russkiye Vedomosti"

In this case, one of the earliest, /ree speech was on trial. On March 24, 1918, this famous
"professorial" newspaper published an article by Savinkov entitled "En Route." They would have
much preferred to arrest Savinkov himself, but he really was en route, damn it, and where was he to



be found? So instead they closed down the paper and brought the elderly editor, P. V. Yegorov, to
court as a defendant, insisting that he explain how he had dared to publish the article. After all, the
New Era was four months old, and it was time to get used to it!

Yegorov naively defended himself by saying that the article had been written by a "leading political
figure whose opinion was of general interest whether or not the editors shared it." Further- more, he
saw nothing slanderous in Savinkov's having said: "Let us not forget that Lenin, Natanson, and Co.
arrived in Russia via Berlin; i.e., that the German authorities helped them return to the homeland" —
because that in actual fact was what had hap- pened; Kaiser Wilhehn's embattled Germany had
helped Com- rade Lenin to return.

Krylenko retorted that he would not conduct a prosecution for slander (why not?), and that the
newspaper was on trial /or attempting to influence people's minds! (And how could any newspaper
dare have such a purpose!?)

The formal charge did not include Savinkov's phrase: "One has to be criminally insane to affirm
seriously that the interna- tional proletariat will come to our aid" — because it still would come to our
aid.

For attempting to influence people's minds, the newspaper, which had been published since 1864 and
had survived the most fiercely reactionary periods — those of Loris-Melikov, Pobedo- nostsev,
Stolypin, Kasso, and all the rest — was ordered closed down forever! And Yegorov, the editor — and
this is a shameful thing to have to say — was given only three months of solitary — just as though we
were in Greece or some such place. (It is not so shamefully lenient, however, if one stops to think
that it was only 1918! And if the old man managed to survive, he would be imprisoned again, and
many more times too! )

It may seem strange to us now, but it is a fact that in those thunderous years bribes were given and
taken just as tenderly as they had been from time immemorial in Old Russia and as they will be in
the Soviet Union from here to eternity. Bribery was particularly rife in the judicial organs. And,
though we blush to say it, in the Cheka. The official histories in their red, gold- stamped bindings are
silent about this, but the old folks and eye- witnesses remember that the fate of political prisoners in
the first years of the Revolution, as distinct from Stalinist times, often depended on bribes: they were
accepted uninhibitedly, and pris- oners were honestly released as a result. Although Krylenko picked
out only a dozen cases for the five-year period his book covers, he reports two cases of bribery. Alas,
even the Moscow Tribunal and the Supreme Tribunal squeezed their way through to perfection along
a crooked path, muddied themselves in im- proprieties.

B. The Case of the Three Interrogators of the Moscow Revtribunal — April, 1918

In March, 1918, a speculator in gold bars named Beridze was arrested. His wife tried to find a way to
ransom her husband, which was the accepted thing to do. Through a series of connec- tions she
succeeded in getting to one of the interrogators, who brought two others in with him. Meeting
secretly, they demanded a bribe of 250,000 rubles, but, after some bargaining, they re- duced it to
60,000, half in advance. The deal was to be made through the lawyer Grin. Everything would have
gone off without a fuss, as hundreds of similar deals had, and the case would have gotten into neither
Krylenko's chronicle nor ours, nor even be- come a matter of concern to the Council of People's
Commissars, had it not been that Beridze's wife began to get miserly, and brought Grin only 15,000
as an advance payment, instead of 30,000. But the main thing was that, in consequence of female
fickleness, she changed her mind overnight, decided her lawyer wasn't good enough for her, and
went off the next morning to find another, the attorney Yakulov. It is not stated anywhere, but it was
evidently Yakulov who decided to turn in the interrogators.

It is of interest that all the witnesses in this trial, beginning with the unfortunate wife, tried to give



testimony helpful to the accused and to befuddle the prosecution. (Which would have been
impossible in a political trial!) Krylenko explained their conduct as the result of a narrow-minded,
Philistine attitude, be- cause they felt like outsiders as far as the Revtribunal was con- cerned. (And
might we ourselves be so audacious as to advance the philistine hypothesis that in the course of a
year and a half the witnesses had already learned to be afraid o/the dictatorship of the proletariat?
After all, it took a lot of nerve to turn in the interrogators of the Revtribunal. What would happen to
you after that?)

The accuser's line of argument is also of interest. After all, just a month earlier the defendants had
been his associates, his comrades in arms, his assistants. They were people who had been inalienably
dedicated to the interests of the Revolution, and one of them, Leist, was even "a stern accuser,
capable of hurling thunder and lightning at anyone who attacked the foundations." What was he to
say about them now? Where was he to look for the causes of their fall? (A bribe was not enough in
itself.) And, of course, it is clear where he looked: in their pasts, in their biog- graphics!

Declared Krylenko: "If we look closely" at this Leist, "we will find highly interesting information."

This is intriguing. Was he an inveterate adventurer? No, but he was the son of a professor at Moscow
University! And not an ordinary professor, but one who had survived twenty years of reaction by his
indifference to political activity! (And who, notwithstanding that reaction, had been accepted by
Krylenko as a consultant.) Was it surprising, then, that the son turned out to be a double-dealer?

As for Podgaisky, he was the son of an official in the law courts . . . beyond doubt one of the
reactionary, pogrom-organizing Black Hundreds; otherwise how could he have served the Tsar for
twenty years? And the son, too, had prepared for a career in the law courts, but then the Revolution
had come — and he had wormed his way into the Revtribunal. Just yesterday all this had been
depicted in a very favorable light, but it had suddenly be- come repulsive!

More repulsive than them both was, of course, Gugel. He had been a publisher. And what intellectual

food had he been offer- ing the workers and peasants? He was "nourishing the broad masses with
low-quality literature," not Marx but, instead, books by bourgeois professors with world-famous
names. (And we shall soon encounter these professors as defendants too.)

Krylenko is enraged and marvels at the kind of people who have sneaked into the tribunal. (Neither
do we understand: What kind of people are the workers' and peasants' tribunals composed of? Why
had the proletariat entrusted the task of striking down their enemies to people of this particular
kind?)

And as for Grin, the lawyer, a man with an "in" on the in- vestigating commission, who was quite
able to get anybody off scot-free, he was a typical representative of that subspecies of the human
race which Marx called "leeches on the capitalist structure" — a category including, in addition, all
lawyers, gen- darmes, priests, and also . . . notaries.

It appears that Krylenko spared no effort in demanding merci- lessly severe sentences, without
reference to "the individual shad- ings of guilt." But some kind of lethargy, some sort of torpor,
overcame the eternally vigorous tribunal, and it just barely man- aged to mumble six months in jail
for the interrogators, and a fine for the lawyer. And only by avaiUng himself of the authority of the
AU-Russian Central Executive Committee "to punish without limitation," did Krylenko, there in the
Metropole, con- tinue to hang ten-year sentences on the interrogators and five on the lawyer, plus
full confiscation of his property. Krylenko thundered on about vigilance, and he almost managed, but
not quite, to get the title of Tribune he so coveted.

We recognize that among the revolutionary masses at the time, as among our readers today, this
unfortunate trial could not but undermine faith in the sanctity of the tribunal. And we there- fore
proceed with even greater timidity to the next case, which concerned an even loftier institution.



C. The Case of Kosyrev— February 15, 1919



F. M. Kosyrev and his pals Libert, Rottenberg, and Solovyev had first served on the Commission for
Supply of the Eastern Front (back before Kolchak, when the enemy forces were the armies of the
Constituent Assembly). It was discovered that there they had found ways to siphon into their own
pockets from seventy thousand to a million rubles at a time; they rode around on fine horses and
engaged in orgies with the nurses. Their Com- mission had acquired a house and an automobile, and
their major- domo lived it up in the Yar Restaurant. (We aren't accustomed to picturing 1918 in this
Ught, but all this was in the testimony of the Revtribunal. )

But none of this, to be sure, was the case against them. No charge had been brought against any of
them in connection with their activities on the Eastern Front; they had even been forgiven all that.
But wonder of wonders ! Hardly had their Commission for Supply been disbanded than all four of
them, with the addition of Nazarenko, a former Siberian tramp and convict pal of Kosyrev in
criminal hard labor, were invited to constitute ... the Control and Auditing Collegium of the
VChK— the Cheka!

Here's what this Collegium was: it had plenipotentiary powers to verify the legality of the actions of
all the remaining organs of the Cheka, the right to demand and review any case at any stage of its
processing, and to reverse the decisions of all the remaining organs of the VChK, excepting only the
Presidium of the Cheka!" This was no small thing. This Collegium was second- in-command in the
Cheka after the Presidium itself — it ranked immediately below Dzerzhinsky-Uritsky-Peters-Latsis-
Menzhin- sky-Yagoda!

The way of life of this comradely group remained just what it had been before. They didn't get
swelled heads; they didn't get carried away. With certain individuals named Maximych, Lenka,
Rafailsky, and Mariupolsky, "who had no connection at all with the Communist Party," they set
up — in private apartments and in the Hotel Savoy — "lavish establishments where card games with
table stakes as high as a thousand rubles a throw were the order of the day, along with heavy
drinking and women." Kosyrev acquired a rich establishment of his own (costing 70,000 rubles) and,
in fact, did not even draw the line at hauling off silver spoons and goblets, and even ordinary
glassware, from the Cheka. (And how did all these objects get to the Cheka? ) "And this was where
his attention was concentrated, rather than in the direction of ideas and ideology, and this was what
he took from the revolu- tionary movement." (In the very act of repudiating the bribes he had
accepted, this leading Chekist, without blinking, volunteered the lie that he possessed 200,000 rubles
from an inheritance in a Chicago bank! Evidently, as far as he was concerned, there was no conflict
between such a circumstance and world revolution!)

Now how did he propose to make proper use of his super- human right to arrest anyone at all and
release anyone at all? Clearly, one had to find a fish with golden roe — and in 1918 there were not a
few such fish in the nets. (After all, the Revolu- tion had been carried out too quickly; they hadn't
found every- thing — how many precious stones, necklaces, bracelets, rings, and earrings the
bourgeois ladies had managed to hide away!) Then one had to make contact with the relatives of
those who had been arrested through some reliable middleman.

Such characters also pass before us at the trial. There was Us- penskaya, a woman of twenty-two.
She had graduated from the St. Petersburg Gymnasium, but hadn't gone on to the university — the
Soviets had come to power — and so, in the spring of 1918, Uspenskaya appeared at the Cheka to
offer her services as an in- former. She qualified on the basis of her appearance, and they accepted
her.

Krylenko has this to say about informing, which in those days had a different label: "For ourselves,
we see nothing shameful in it, we consider this to be our duty . . . the work itself is not dis- graceful;
once a person admits that this work is necessary in the interests of the Revolution, then he must do



it." But, alas, it turned out that Uspenskaya had no political credo! That's what was awful. She
declared: "I agreed in order to be paid a fixed percentage" on the cases which were turned up, and,
beyond that, "to split 50-50" with someone else . . . whom the court protected and instructed her not
to identify. Krylenko put it in his own words: "Uspenskaya was not a staff member of the Cheka but
worked at piece rates." And, incidentally, the accuser, under- standing her in a very human way,
explains that she had grown used to having plenty of money, and that her insignificant salary of 500
rubles from the Supreme Council of the Economy was nothing at all, considering that one exercise in
extortion — for example, helping a merchant get the seal removed from his store — would net her
5,000 rubles, and another — from Meshcherskaya-Grevs, wife of a prisoner — would bring in 17,000.
For that matter, Uspenskaya served only briefly as a mere stool pigeon. Thanks to the help of certain
big Chekists, in a few months she became a member of the Communist Party and an interrogator.

However, we don't seem to be getting to the essence of the case. Uspenskaya had arranged a meeting
between this Meshch- erskaya-Grevs and a certain Godelyuk, a bosom pal of Kosyrev, in order to
reach an agreement on her husband's ransom. (They had initially demanded 600,000 rubles!) But
unfortunately, by some still unexplained means, the arrangements for that secret meeting became
known to the same attorney, Yakulov, who had already done in the three bribe-taking interrogators
and who, evidently, felt a class hatred for the whole proletarian system of judicial and extrajudicial
processing. Yakulov denounced them to the Moscow Revtribunal, and the presiding judge of the
tribunal, recalling perhaps the wrath of the Council of People's Commissars in connection with the
three interrogators, also blundered in terms of class premises.

[In order to temper the reader's indignation against this leechlike snake, Yakulov, we should point
out that by the time of Kosyrev's trial he had already been arrested and was in custody. They had
found a case to take care of him. He was brought in to testify accompanied by convoy, and we are
certainly entitled to hope that he was shot soon afterward. (Today we are surprised: How did things
reach such a pitch of illegality? Why did no one mount an offensive against it?)]

Instead of simply warning Comrade Dzerzhinsky and working it all out in the family, he hid a steno-
grapher behind the curtain. And the stenographer took down all Godelyuk's references to Kosyrev,
and to Solovyev and to other commissars, and all his stories about who in the Cheka takes how many
thousands. Then, as per the stenographic record, Godelyuk received an advance payment of 12,000
rubles, and Meshcher- . skaya-Grevs was given a pass to enter the Cheka that had already been filled
out by the Control and Auditing Collegium, by Libert and Rottenberg. (The bargaining was to
continue there, inside the Cheka.) Then and there Godelyuk was caught! In his con- fusion, he gave
testimony against them! (And Meshcherskaya- Grevs had already gotten to the Control and Auditing
Collegium, and they had already ordered her husband's case transferred there /or verification.)

But just a moment! After all, an expose like this sullies the heavenly blue uniforms of the Cheka!
Was the presiding judge of the Moscow Revtribunal in his right mind? Was he really tending to his
own business?

But it turns out that that was the nature of the moment — a moment totally hidden from us in the folds
of our majestic history! It seems that the Cheka's first year of work had produced a some- what
repellent impression even on the Party of the proletariat, which still hadn't gotten used to it. Only its
first year had passed; the Cheka had taken only the first step on its glorious path; and already, as
Krylenko writes, although not very clearly, a "dispute" had arisen "between the court and its
functions and the extra- judicial functions of the Cheka ... a dispute which, at the time, split the Party
and the workers' districts into two camps." And that is how the Kosyrev case could come up —
whereas everything had gone smoothly before — and reach all the way up to the top- most level of the
whole state apparatus.

The Cheka had to be saved! Help! Save the Cheka! Solovyev asked the tribunal to allow him inside
the Taganka Prison to visit Godelyuk (who, alas, was not in the Lubyanka) so as to chat with him.



The tribunal declined the request. Then Solovyev managed to penetrate into Godelyuk's cell without
the help of any tribunal, and — what a coincidence! — at that very point Godelyuk became seriously
ill. ("One can hardly speak of evil intentions on Solovyev's part," Krylenko bows and scrapes.)
Feeling the approach of death, Godelyuk shakily repented hav- ing slandered the Cheka and asked
for a sheet of paper on which to write his recantation: it was all untrue; he had slandered Kosyrev
and the other commissars of the Cheka, and everything the stenographer had taken down behind the
curtain was also untrue!

[Oh, how many themes we have here! Oh, where is Shakespeare? Solovyev passes through the walls,
flickering shadows in the cell, Godelyuk recants with failing hand. And all we hear about the years
of the Revolution in our plays and our films is the street singing of "Hostile Whirlwinds."]

"And who filled out the passes for Meshcherskaya-Grevs?" Krylenko insisted. They hadn't
materialized out of thin air, cer- tainly? No, the chief accuser "does not wish to say that Solovyev
was an accessory in this case, because . . . because there is in- sufficient evidence," but he advances
the hypothesis that "citizens still at liberty who were in danger of being caught with their hands in
the till" might have sent Solovyev to the Taganka jail.

This was the perfect time to question Libert and Rottenberg, and they were subpoenaed, but they
didn't appear! Just like that! They didn't show up. They declined to. All right, in that case question
Meshcherskaya-Grevs! And — can you imagine it? — this broken-down aristocrat, too, was so brazen
as not to appear before the Revtribunal! And there was no way to force her to! Godelyuk had
recanted — and was dying. Kosyrev refused to admit anything! Solovyev was not guilty of anything!
So there was no one to question.

What witnesses, on the other hand, did indeed appear before the tribunal, and of their own free will!
The Deputy Chief of the Cheka, Comrade Peters. And even Feliks Edmundovich Dzer- zhinsky
himself. He arrived in a state of alarm. His long, burning zealot's face confronted the tribunal —
whose members sat with sinking hearts — and he testified passionately in defense of the totally
innocent Kosyrev and his high moral, revolutionary, and professional qualities. This testimony, alas,
has not been pre- served for us, but Krylenko refers to it this way: "Solovyev and Dzerzhinsky
portrayed Kosyrev's wonderful qualites." (Alas, you careless shavetail, you! In twenty years' time, in
the Lub- yanka, they are going to remind you of that trial! ) It is easy to guess what Dzerzhinsky
could have said: that Kosyrev was an iron Chekist, merciless to their enemies; that he was a good
comrade. A hot heart, a cool head, clean hands.

And from the garbage heap of slander, the bronze knight Kosyrev rises before our eyes. Furthermore,
his whole biography testifies to his remarkable will. Before the Revolution he was convicted several
times — most often for murder. In the city of Kostroma, he was convicted of worming his way by
deception into the house of an old woman named Smirnova and strangling her with his own hands;
then of an attempt to kill his own father; and then of killing a comrade in order to use his passport.
The rest of Kosyrev's convictions were for swindling, and in all he spent many years at hard labor.
(One could understand his desire for a luxurious life.) And he had only been freed by the Tsarist
amnesties.

At that point, the stern and righteous voices of the major Chekists interrupted the chief accuser; they
pointed out to him that those courts which had convicted Kosyrev were courts of the bourgeoisie and
landowners and did not merit being noticed in our new society. But what happened? The shavetail,
going overboard, poured forth from the chief accuser's rostrum a tirade so ideologically faulty that in
our exposition of this harmonious series of cases tried by the tribunals, citing it is to strike a dis-
cordant note.

"If there was anything good in the old Tsarist court system, it was only trial by jury. . . . One could
always have confidence in the jurors' decisions and a minimum of judicial error was to be found in



them."



It was all the more vexing to hear this sort of thing from Comrade Krylenko because just three
months before, at the trial of the provocateur R. Malinovsky, a former favorite of the Com- munist
Party leadership, who, notwithstanding his four criminal convictions in the past, had been co-opted
into the Central Committee by the leadership and appointed to the Duma, the accusing power had
taken an impeccable class stand.

"Every crime is the result of a given social system, and in these terms criminal convictions under the
laws of a capitalist society and in Tsarist times do not, in our eyes, constitute a fact branding a
person with an indelible mark once and for all. . . . We know of many examples of persons in our
ranks branded by such facts in the past, but we have never drawn the con- elusion that it was
necessary to remove such a person from our milieu. A person who knows our principles cannot fear
that the existence of previous criminal convictions in his record will jeopardize his being included in
the ranks of the revolution- aries."

That is how Comrade Krylenko could speak when in a Party vein. But in this other case, as a result
of his mistaken judgment, the image of the knight in shining armor, Kosyrev, was being bespattered.
And it created a situation in the tribunal wherein Comrade Dzerzhinsky was forced to say: "For just
one second [Just one second!] the thought crossed my mind that citizen Kosyrev might be falling
victim to the political passions which in recent times have blazed up around the Extraordinary
Commis- sion. "

And Krylenko suddenly took thought: "I do not wish, and I never have wished, that the present trial

should turn into a trial of the Cheka rather than a trial of Kosyrev and Uspenskaya. Not only am I
unable to desire such an outcome: I am obliged to fight against it with all available means!" And he
went on: "The most responsible, honest, and self-controlled comrades were put at the head of the
Extraordinary Commission, and they took on themselves the difficult task of striking down the
enemy, even though this involved the risk of error. . . . For this the Revolution is obliged to say thank
you. ... I underline this aspect so that ... no one can ever say to me later: 'He turned out to be an
instrument of political treason!' "" (But that's what they will say!)

What a razor edge the supreme accuser was walking! But he evidently had certain contacts, going
back to his days in the underground, through which he learned how things were going to move on
the morrow. This is conspicuous in several trials, and came out here too. At the beginning of 1919,
there were certain trends toward saying: "It is enough! It is time to bridle the Cheka!" And this
moment was "beautifully caught in Bukharin's essay, in which he said that revolutionary legality
must give way to legalized revolutionary."

Wherever you look you see dialectics! And Krylenko burst out: "The Revtribunal is being called on

to replace the Extraor- dinary Commission." (To replace???) Meanwhile, it "must be ... no less
fierce in implementing the system of terror, intimida- tion, and threat than was the Extraordinary
Commission — ^the Cheka."

Than it was? The past tense? Has he already buried it? Come now, you are going to replace it, and
where are the Chekists supposed to go? Ominous days! That was reason enough to hurry to the
tribunal, in a greatcoat down to one's heels, to testify as a witness.

But perhaps your sources of information. Comrade Krylenko, are false?

Yes, the heavens darkened over the Lubyanka in those days. And this whole book might have been
very different. But I sup- pose that what happened was that iron Feliks Dzerzhinsky went to see
Vladimir Ilyich Lenin, and talked it over and explained. And the skies cleared. And although two
days later, on Feb- ruary 17, 1919, the Cheka was deprived of its judicial rights by special decree of



the All-Russian Central Executive Committee — it was "not for long."

Our day in court was further complicated by the fact that the objectionable Uspenskaya behaved
abominably. From the de- fendants' bench she "threw mud at" leading Chekists who had not
previously been touched by the trial, including Comrade Peters! (She turned out to have used his
pure name in her black- mailing operations; she used to sit right in his office, without any ceremony,
during his conversations with other intelligence agents.) Now she hinted at some dark
prerevolutionary past of his in Riga. That's the kind of snake she had turned into in eight months,
despite the fact that she had been with Chekists during those eight months! What was to be done
with such a woman? Here Krylenko's position jibed completely with that of the Chekists : "Until a
firm regime has been established, and we are a long way from that being the case [Are we
really???] ... in the interests of the defense of the Revolution . . . there is not and cannot be any
sentence for citizeness Uspenskaya other than her annihilation." He did not say "to be shot" — what
he said was "annihilation"! But after all. Citizen Krylenko, she's just a young girl! Come on now,
give her a "tenner," or maybe a "twenty- five," and maybe the system will be firmly established by
then? How about it? But alas: "In the interests of society and of the Revolution there is no other
answer, nor can there be one — and the question cannot be put any other way. In the given case,
detention isn't going to bear any fruit!"

She had sure rubbed the salt in. ... She knew too much. . . .

And Kosyrev had to be sacrificed too. They shot him. It was for the health of the others.

Can it really be that someday we will read the old Lubyanka archives? No, they will bum them. They
already have.

As the reader can see for himself, this was a very unimportant case. We didn't have to dwell on it.
But here is a different one.

D. The Case of the "Churchmen"— January 11-16, 1920

This case, in Krylenko's opinion, is going to have a "suitable place in the annals of the Russian
Revolution." Right there in the annals, indeed! It took one day to wring Kosyrev's neck, but in this
case they dragged things out for five whole days.

The principal defendants were: A. D. Samarin (a famous man in Russia, the former chief procurator
of the Synod; a man who had tried to liberate the church from the Tsar's yoke, an enemy of Rasputin
whom Rasputin had forced out of office);

[But accuser Krylenko saw no difference whatever between Samarin and Rasputin.]

Kuznetsov, Professor of Church Law at Moscow University; the Moscow archpriests Uspensky and
Tsvetkov. (The accuser him- self had this to say about Tsvetkov: "An important public figure,
perhaps the best that the clergy could produce, a philanthropist.")

Their guilt lay in creating the "Moscow Council of United Parishes," which had in turn recruited,
from among believers forty to eighty years old, a voluntary guard for the Patriarch (unarmed, of
course), which had set up permanent day and night watches in his residence, who were charged with
the responsi- bility, in the event of danger from the authorities to the Patriarch, of assembling the
people by ringing the church alarm bells and by telephone, so that a whole crowd might follow
wherever the Patriarch might be taken and beg — and there's your counter- revolution for you! — the
Council of People's Commissars to re- lease him!

What an ancient Russian — Holy Russian — scheme! To as- semble the people by ringing the alarm



bells . . . and proceed in a crowd with a petition!

And the accuser was astonished. What danger threatened the Patriarch? Why had plans been made to
defend him?

Well, of course, it was really no more than the fact that the Cheka had for two years been conducting
extrajudicial reprisals against undesirables, the fact that only a short while before four Red Army
men in Kiev had killed the Metropolitan, the fact that the Patriarch's "case had already been worked
up and com- pleted, and all that remained was to bring it before the Rev- tribunal," and "it was only
out of concern for the broad masses of workers and peasants, still under the influence of clerical
propaganda, that we have left these, our class enemies, alone for the time being." How could
Orthodox believers possibly be alarmed on the Patriarch's account? During those two years Patriarch
Tikhon had refused to keep silent. He had sent messages to the People's Commissars, to the clergy,
and to his flock. His messages were not accepted by the printers but were copied on typewriters (the
first samizdat). They exposed the annihilation of the innocents, the ruin of the country. How,
therefore, could anyone really be concerned for the Patriarch's life?

A second charge was brought against the defendants. Through- out the country, a census and
requisition of church property was taking place (this was in addition to the closing of monasteries
and the expropriation of church lands and properties; in question here were liturgical vessels, cups,
and candelabra). And the Council of Parishes had disseminated an appeal to believers to resist the
requisition, sounding the alarm on the church bells. (And that was natural, after all! That, after all,
was how they had defended the churches against the Tatars too!)

And the third charge against them was their incessant, im- pudent dispatching of petitions to the
Council of People's Com- missars for relief from the desecration of the churches by local authorities,
from crude blasphemy and violations of the law which guaranteed freedom of conscience. Even
though no action was taken on these petitions (according to the testimony of Bonch- Bruyevich,
administrative officer of the Council of People's Com- missars), they had discredited the local
authorities.

Taking into consideration all the violations committed by these defendants, what punishment could

the accuser possibly demand for these awful crimes? Will not the reader's revolutionary con- science
prompt the answer? To be shot, of course. And that is just what Krylenko did demand — for Samarin
and Kuznetsov.

But while they were fussing around with these damned legal formalities, and listening to too many
long speeches from too many bourgeois lawyers (speeches which "for technical reasons" we will not
cite here), it turned out that capital punishment had been . . . abolished! What a fix! It just couldn't
be! What had happened? It developed that Dzerzhinsky had issued this order to the Cheka (the
Cheka, without capital punishment?). But had it been extended to the tribunals by the Council of
People's Com- missars? Not yet. Krylenko cheered up. And he continued to de- mand execution by
shooting, on the following grounds:

"Even if we suppose that the consolidation of the Republic has removed the immediacy of threat
from such persons, it seems nonetheless indubitable that in this period of creative effort ... a
purge ... of the old turncoat leaders ... is required by revolu- tionary necessity." And further: "Soviet
power is proud of the decree of the Cheka abolishing the death penalty." But this "still does not force
us to conclude that the question of the abolition of capital punishment has been decided once and for
all ... for the entire period of Soviet rule."

That was quite prophetic! Capital punishment would return — and very soon too! After all, what a
long line still remained to be rubbed out! (Yes, including Krylenko too, and many of his class
brothers as well.)



And, indeed, the tribunal was submissive and sentenced Samarin and Kuznetsov to be shot, but they
did manage to tack on a recommendation for clemency: to be imprisoned in a con- centration camp
until the final victory over world imperialism! (They would still be sitting there today!) And as for
"the best that the clergy could produce" — his sentence was fifteen years, commuted to five. Other
defendants as well were dragged into this trial in order to add at least a little substance to the charges.
Among them were some monks and teachers of Zvenigorod, involved in the Zvenigorod affair in the
summer of 1918, but for some reason not brought to trial for a year and a half (or they might have
been, but were now being tried again, since it was expedient).

That summer some Soviet officials had called on Father Superior Ion at the Zvenigorod monastery
and ordered him ("Step lively there!") to turn over to them the holy relics of St. Savva.

[Firguf, a former guards officer of the Tsar's household cavalry, who had "suddenly undergone a
spiritual conversion, given all his goods to the poor, and entered a monastery, but I do not in fact
know whether he actually did distribute his goods to the poor." Yes, and if one admits the possibility
of spiritual conversion, what then remains of class theory?]

The officials not only smoked inside the church and evidently be- hind the altar screen as well, and,
of course, refused to take off their caps, but one of them took Savva's skull in his hands and be- gan
to spit into it, to demonstrate that its sanctity was an illusion. And there were further acts of
desecration. This led to the alarm bell being sounded, a popular uprising, and the killing of one or
two of the officials. (The others denied having committed any acts of desecration, including the
spitting incident, and Krylenko accepted their denials.)

[But which of us doesn't remember similar scenes? My first memory is of an event that took place
when I was, probably, three or four: The peaked- head (as they called the Chekists in their high-
peaked Budenny caps) invaded a Kislovodsk church, sliced through the dumbstruck crowd of
worshipers, and, in their pointed caps, went straight through the altar screen to the altar and stopped
the service.]

Were these officials the ones on trial now? No, the monks.

We beg the reader, throughout, to keep in mind: from 1918 on, our judicial custom determined that
every Moscow trial, except, of course, the unjust trial of the Chekists, was by no means an isolated
trial of an accidental concatenation of cir- cumstances which had converged by accident; it was a
landmark of judicial policy; it was a display- window model whose specifi- cations determined what
product was good for the provinces too; it was a standard; it was like that one-and-only model
solution up front in the arithmetic book for the schoolchildren to follow for themselves.

Thus, when we say, "the trial of the churchmen," this must be understood in the multiple plural . . .

"many trials." And, in fact, the supreme accuser himself willingly explains: "Such trials have rolled
along through almost all the tribunals of the Republic." (What language!) They had taken place not
long before in the tribunals in North Dvina, Tver, and Ryazan; in Saratov, Kazan, Ufa,
Solvychegodsk, and Tsarevokokshaisk, trials were held of the clergy, the choirs, and the active
members of the congrega- tion — representatives of the ungrateful "Orthodox church, liberated by the
October Revolution."

The reader will be aware of a conflict here: why did many of these trials occur earlier than the

Moscow model? This is simply a shortcoming of our exposition. The judicial and the extrajudicial
persecution of the liberated church had begun well back in 1918, and, judging by the Zvenigorod
affair, it had already reached a peak of intensity by that summer. In October, 1918, Patriarch Tikhon
had protested in a message to the Council of People's Commissars that there was no freedom to
preach in the churches and that "many courageous priests have already paid for their preaching with
the blood of martyrdom. . . . You have laid your hands on church property collected by generations



of believers, and you have not hesitated to violate their posthumous intent."

(The People's Commissars did not, of course, read the message, but the members of their
administrative staff must have had a good laugh: Now they've really got something to reproach us
with — posthumous intent! We sh-t on your ancestors! We are only interested in descendants.) "They
are executing bishops, priests, monks, and nuns who are guilty of nothing, on the basis of
indiscriminate charges of indefinite and vaguely counterrevolu- tionary offenses." True, with the
approach of Denikin and Kolchak, this was stopped, so as to make it easier for Orthodox believers to
defend the Revolution. But hardly had the Civil War begun to die down than they took up their
cudgels against the church again, and the cases started rolling through the tribunals once more. In
1920 they struck at the Trinity-St. Sergius Mona- stery and went straight to the holy relics of that
chauvinist Sergius of Radonezh, and hauled them off to a Moscow museum.

[The Patriarch cited Klyuchevsky: "The gates of the monastery of the Saint will shut and the ikon
lamps will be extinguished over his sepulcher only when we shall have lost every vestige of that
spiritual and moral strength willed to us by such great builders of the Russian land as Saint Sergius."
Klyuchevsky did not imagine that the loss would occur almost in his own lifetime. The Patriarch
asked for an appointment with the Chairman of the Council of People's Commissars, in the hope of
persuading him not to touch the holy monastery and the relics ... for after all the church was
separate from the state! The answer came back that the Chairman was occupied in discussing
important business, and that the appointment could not be arranged for the near future.

Nor for the distant future either.]

The People's Commissariat of Justice issued a directive, dated August 25, 1920, for the liquidation of
relics of all kinds, since they were a significant obstacle to the resplendent movement toward a new,
just society.

Pursuing further Krylenko's own selection of cases, let us also examine the case tried in the
Verkhtrib — in other words, the Supreme Tribunal. (How affectionately they abbreviated words
within their intimate circle, but how they roared out for us little insects: "Rise! The court is in
session!")

E. The Case of the "Tactical Center"— August 16-20, 1920

In this case there were twenty-eight defendants present, plus additional defendants who were being
tried in absentia because they weren't around.

At the very beginning of his impassioned speech, in a voice not yet grown hoarse and in phrases
illumined by class analysis, the supreme accuser informs us that in addition to the land- owners and
the capitalists "there existed and there continues to exist one additional social stratum, the social
characteristics of which have long since been under consideration by the repre- sentatives of
revolutionary socialism. [In other words: to be or not to be?] This stratum is the so-called
'intelligentsia.' In this trial, we shall be concerned with the judgment of history on the activity of the
Russian intelligentsia" and with the verdict of the Revolution on it.

The narrow limits of our investigation prevent our compre- bending exactly the particular manner in
which the representa- tives of revolutionary socialism were taking under consideration the fate of the
so-called intelligentsia and what specifically they were planning for it. However, we take comfort in
the fact that these materials have been published, that they are accessible to everyone, and that they
can be assembled in any required detail. Therefore, solely to understand the over-all atmosphere of
the Republic, we shall recall the opinion of the Chairman of the Council of People's Commissars in
the years when all these tribunal sessions were going on.



In a letter to Gorky on September 15, 1919 — which we have already cited — Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
replied to Gorky's attempts to intercede in the arrests of members of the intelligentsia, among them,
evidently, some of the defendants in this trial, and, com- menting on the bulk of the Russian
intelligentsia of those years (the "close-to-the-Cadets intelligentsia"), he wrote: "In actual fact they
are not [the nation's] brains, but shit." On another occasion he said to Gorky: "If we break too many
pots, it will be its [the intelligentsia's] fault." If the intelligentsia wants justice, why doesn't it come
over to us? "I've gotten one bullet from the intelligentsia myself." (In other words, from Kaplan.)

On the basis of these feelings, he expressed his mistrust and hostility toward the intelligentsia:
rotten-liberal; "pious"; "the slovenliness so customary among 'educated' people"; he be- lieved the
intelligentsia was always shortsighted, that it had betrayed the cause of the workers. (But when had
the intel- ligentsia ever sworn loyalty to the cause of the workers, the dictatorship of the workers?)

This mockery of the intelligentsia, this contempt for the intel- ligentsia, was subsequently adopted
with enthusiasm by the publicists and the newspapers of the twenties and was absorbed into the
current of day-to-day life. And in the end, the members of the intelligentsia accepted it too, cursing
their eternal thought- lessness, their eternal duality, their eternal spinelessness, and their hopeless
lagging behind the times.

And this was just! The voice of the accusing power echoed and re-echoed beneath the vaults of the
Verkhtrib, returning us to the defendants' bench.

"This social stratum . . . has, during recent years, undergone the trial of universal re-evaluation." Yes,
yes, re-evaluation, as was so often said at the time. And how did that re-evaluation occur? Here's
how: "The Russian intelligentsia which entered the crucible of the Revolution with slogans of power
for the people [so, it had something to it after all!] emerged from it an ally of the black [not even
White!] generals, and a hired [!] and obedient agent of European imperialism. The intelligentsia
trampled on its own banners [as in the army, yes?] and covered them with mud."

How, indeed, can we not cry out our hearts in repentance?

How can we not lacerate our chests with our fingernails?

And the only reason why "there is no need to deal out the death blow to its individual
representatives" is that "this social group has outlived its time."

Here, at the start of the twentieth century! What power of foresight! Oh, scientific revolutionaries!
(However, the intel- ligentsia had to he, finished oj^ anyway. Throughout the twenties they kept
finishing them off and finishing them off.)

We examine with hostility the twenty-eight individual allies of the black generals, the hirelings of
European imperialism. And we are especially aroused by the stench of the word Center. Now we see
a Tactical Center, now a National Center, and now a Right Center. (And in our recollection of the
trials of two decades. Centers keep creeping in all the time. Centers and Centers, Engineers' Centers,
Menshevik Centers, Trotskyite- Zinovievite Centers, Rightist-Bukharinite Centers, but all of them
are crushed, all crushed, and that is the only reason you and I are still alive.) Wherever there is a
Center, of course, the hand of imperialism can be found.

True, we feel a measure of relief when we learn that the Tactical Center on this occasion was not an
organization; that it did not have: (1) statutes; (2) a program; (3) membership dues. So, what did it
have? Here's what: They used to meet! (Goose-pimples up and down the back!) And when they met,
they undertook to familiarize themselves with one another's point of view! (Icy chills!)

The charges were extremely serious and were supported by the evidence. There were two (2) pieces



of evidence to cor- roborate the charges against twenty-eight accused individuals.

These were two letters from people who were not present in court because they were abroad:
Myakotin and Fyodorov. They were absent, but until the October Revolution they had been members
of the same committees as those who were present, a circum- stance that gave us the right to equate
those who were absent with those who were present. And their letters dealt with their disagreements
with Denikin on certain trivial questions: the peasant question (we are not told what these differences
were, but they were evidently advising Denikin to give the land to the peasants) ; the Jewish question
(they were evidently advising him not to return to the previous restrictions) ; the federated nationali-
ties question (enough said: clear); the question of the structure of the government (democracy rather
than dictatorship); and similar matters. And what conclusion did this evidence suggest? Very simple.
It proved the fact of correspondence, and it also proved the agreement, the unanimity, of those
present with Denikin! (Grrr! Grrrr!)

But there were also direct accusations against those present: that they had exchanged information
with acquaintances who lived in outlying areas (Kiev, for example) which were not under the control
of the central Soviet authorities! In other words, this used to be Russia, let's say, but then in the
interests of world revolution we ceded this one piece to Germany. And people continued to exchange
letters. How are you doing there, Ivan Ivanich? Here's how things are going with us. N. M. Kishkin,
a member of the Central Committee of the Cadets, was so brazen as to try to justify himself right
from the defendants' bench: "A man doesn't want to be blind. He tries to find out everything he can
about what's going on everywhere."

To find out everything about what's going on everywhere? He doesn't want to be blind? Well, all one
can say is that the accuser correctly described their actions as treason, treason to Soviet power!

But their most heinous acts were something else again. In the midst of the Civil War they wrote
books, composed memoranda and projects. Yes, as experts in constitutional law, financial science,
economic relationships, the system of justice, and educa- tion, they wrote works! (And, as one might
easily guess, their works were not based on earlier works by Lenin, Trotsky, and Bukharin.)
Professor Kotlyarevsky wrote on the federal struc- ture of Russia; V. I. Stempkovsky on the agrarian
question (no doubt, without collectivization); V. S. Muralevich on education in the future Russia; N.
N. Vinogradsky on economics. And the (great) biologist N. K. Koltsov (who never received anything
from the Motherland except persecution and execution) allowed all those bourgeois big shots to get
together in his institute for their discussions. (N. D. Kondratyev was included here also. In 1931 he
was condemned once and for all in connection with TKP — the fictitious Working Peasants Party. )

Our accuser's heart jumps right out of our chest, outrunning the sentence. Well, what punishment
was adequate for these as- sistants to the general? Just one, of course — to be shot! That was not
merely what the accuser demanded — it was the sentence of the tribunal. (Alas, it was later commuted
to concentration camp until the end of the Civil War.)

And indeed the defendants' guilt consisted in the fact that they hadn't sat in their own comers,
sucking on their quarter- pound of bread; that "they had talked things over and reached agreements
as to what the state structure should be after the fall of the Soviet regime."

In contemporary scientific language, this is known as the study of the alternative possibility.

The voice of the accuser thundered, but we hear some kind of crack in it. As if his eyes were
searching the rostrum, looking for another piece of paper? A quotation, perhaps? Give it to him on
tiptoe, quick, quick! Give him one at random! From some other trial? It's not important! Wasn't this
the one, Nikolai Vasilyevich Krylenko?

"For us ... the concept of torture inheres in the very fact of holding political prisoners in prison. ..."



So that's it! It is torture to keep political prisoners in prison! And the accuser said so! What a
generous view! A new jurispru- dence is arising! And further:

". . . Struggle against the Tsarist government was second nature to them [the politicals] and not to
struggle against Tsarism was something of which they were incapable."

What's that? They were incapable of not studying alternative possibilities? Perhaps thinking was first
nature to the intellectual?

Alas, through stupidity, they had shoved the wrong quotation at him. Now wasn't that a mix-up for
you! But Nikolai Vasilyevich was already off to the races.

"And even j/the defendants here in Moscow did not lift a

finger [and it looks very much as though that's the way it was] at such a moment, nevertheless . . .
even a conversation over a teacup as to the kind of system that should replace the Soviet system,
which is allegedly about to fall, is a counterrevolutionary act. . . . During the Civil War not only is
any kind of action [against Soviet power] a crime . . . but the/ac? of inaction is also criminal. "

Well, now everything is comprehensible, everything is clear. They are being sentenced to death — for
inaction. For a cup of tea.

The Petrograd intellectuals, for example, decided that in the event of Yudenich's taking the city, they
would first of all "con- cem themselves with convening a democratic municipal Duma." (In other
words, to safeguard the city against a possible dictator- ship.)

Krylenko: "I would like to shout at them: 'It was your duty to think first of all how you might die in
battle, so as not to allow Yudenich into the city!' "

But they didn't die in battle.

(Nor, in fact, did Nikolai Vasilyevich Krylenko.)

In addition, there were certain defendants who knew about all this talk and yet kept silent, did not
write denunciations. (In our contemporary lingo: "He knew, but he didn't tell.")

And here is another real example not merely of inaction but of actively criminal action. Through L.

N. Khrushcheva, a member of the Political Red Cross (and there she was, on the defendants' bench),
some of the other defendants had raised money to help the Butyrki prisoners . (One can just picture
that flood of capital — pouring into the prison commissary! ) And they had supplied various articles
too. (Yes, indeed. Just look. Woolens, too, perhaps?)

There were no bounds to their evil-doing! Nor would there be any limits to their proletarian
punishment!

As when a cinema projector starts slowing down, twenty-eight prerevolutionary male and female
faces flicker past us in a film that's fuzzy and askew. We didn't notice their expressions! Were they
frightened? Contemptuous? Proud?

We don't have their answers! Their last words are missing —

because of "technical considerations." But, making up for this lack, the accuser croons to us: "From
beginning to end, it was self-flagellation and repentance for the mistakes they committed. The
political instability and the interim nature of the Intel- Ugentsia . . . [yes, yes, here comes another



one: interim nature] completely justified that Marxist evaluation of the intelligentsia made by the
Bolsheviks."

I don't know. Perhaps they did engage in self-flagellation. Perhaps they didn't. Perhaps the passion to
save one's life at any cost had already come into being. Perhaps the old dignity of the intelligentsia
had still been maintained. ... I don't know.

Who was that young woman flashing past?

That was Tolstoi's daughter, Alexandra. Krylenko asked her: "What did you do during these
conversations?" And she an- swered: "I attended to the samovar." Three years of concentra- tion
camp!

And who was that man over there? His face was familiar. It was Savva Morozov. But listen here:
after all, he gave the Bolsheviks all that money! And now he has handed a little to these people?
Three years in prison, but released on probation. Let that be a lesson to him!

[He would soon cut his own throat.]

And that's how the sun of our freedom rose. It was as just such a well-nourished little imp that our
Octobrist child — Law — began to grow.

Today we don't remember this at all.

Chapter 9

The Law Becomes a Man

Our review has already grown. Yet we have in fact hardly begun. All the big and famous trials are
still ahead of us. But their basic lines have already been indicated.

So let us stick with our Law while it is still in its boy scout stage.

Let us recall one long -forgotten case which was not even political.

F. The Case of Glavtop— May, 1921

This case was important because it involved engineers — or, as they had been christened in the
terminology of the times, "specialists," or spetsy. (Glavtop was the Main Fuels Committee.)

Nineteen twenty-one was the most difficult of all the four winters of the Civil War; nothing was left
for fuel, and trains simply couldn't get to the next station; and there were cold and famine in the
capitals, and a wave of strikes in the factories- strikes which, incidentally, have been completely
wiped out of our history books by now. Who was to blame? That was a famous question: Who is to
blame?

Well, obviously, not the Over- All Leadership. And not even the local leadership. That was
important. If the "comrades who were often brought in from outside" — i.e., the Communist leaders
— did not have a correct grasp of the business at hand, then it was the engineers, or spetsy, who were
supposed to "outline for them the correct approach to the problem." And this meant that "it was not
the leaders who were to blame. . . . Those who had worked out the calculations were to blame, those
who had re- figured the calculations, those who had calculated the plan" — which consisted of how
to produce food and heat with zeros. Those to blame weren't the ones who compelled but the ones
who calculated! If the planning turned out to be inflated, the spetsy were the ones to blame. Because



the figures did not jibe, "this was the fault of the spetsy, not of the Council of Labor and Defense"
and "not even of the responsible men in charge of Glavtop — the Main Fuels Committee."

If there was no coal, firewood, or petroleum, it was because the spetsy had "brought about a mixed-
up, chaotic situation." And it was their own fault that they hadn't resisted the urgent telephonograms
from Rykov and the government — and had issued and allotted fuels outside the scope of the plan.

The spetsy were to blame for everything. But the proletarian court was not merciless with them.
Their sentences were lenient. Of course, an inner hostility to those cursed spetsy remains in
proletarian hearts — but one can't get along without them; every- thing goes to rack and ruin. And the
tribunal doesn't persecute them, and Krylenko even says that from 1920 on "there is no question of
any sabotage." The spetsy are to blame, but not out of malice on their part; it's simply because they
are inept; they aren't able to do any better; under capitalism, they hadn't learned to work, or else they
were simply egotists and bribe-takers.

And so, at the beginning of the reconstruction period, a sur- prising tendency toward leniency could
be observed in regard to the engineers.

The year 1922, the first year of peace, was rich in public trials, so rich that almost this entire chapter
will be devoted to that year alone. (People are surprised: the war has ended, and yet there is an
increase in court activity? But in 1945, too, and in 1948, the Dragon became very, very energetic. Is
there not, per- haps, a simple sort of law in this?)

Although in December, 1921, the Ninth Congress of the Soviets decreed that the authority of the
Cheka be narrowed and, in consequence, its authority was indeed narrowed and it was renamed the
GPU, as early as October, 1922, the powers of the GPU were broadened again, and in December
Dzerzhinsky told a Pravda correspondent: "Now we need to keep watch with particular vigilance
over anti-Soviet currents and group- ings. The GPU has reduced its apparatus but strengthened it in
terms of quality."

And, at the beginning of 1922, we must not bypass:

G. The Case of the Suicide of Engineer Oldenborger (Tried before the Verkhtrib — the
Supreme Tribunal — in February, 1922)

This case is forgotten, insignificant, and totally atypical. It was atypical because its entire scale was
that of a single life that had already ended. And if that life hadn't ended, it would have been that very
engineer, yes, and ten more with him, forming a Center, who would have sat before the Verkhtrib; in
that event the case would have been altogether typical. But as it was, an outstanding Party comrade,
Sedelnikov, sat on the defendants' bench and, with him, two members of the RKI — the Workers' and
Peasants' Inspection — and two trade-union officials.

But, like Chekhov's far-off broken harp-string, there was something plaintive in this trial; it was, in
its own way, an early predecessor of the Shakhty and Promparty trials.

V. V. Oldenborger had worked for thirty years in the Moscow water-supply system and had
evidently become its chief engineer back at the beginning of the century. Even though the Silver Age
of art, four State Dumas, three wars, and three revolutions had come and gone, all Moscow drank
Oldenborger's water. The Acmeists and the Futurists, the reactionaries and the revolution- aries, the
military cadets and the Red Guards, the Council of People's Commissars, the Cheka, and the
Workers' and Peasants' Inspection — all had drunk Oldenborger's pure cold water. He had never
married and he had no children. His whole life had consisted of that one water-supply system. In
1905 he refused to permit the soldiers of the guard near the water-supply conduits — "because the
soldiers, out of clumsiness, might break the pipes or machinery." On the second day of the February



Revolution he said to his workers that that was enough, the revolution was over, and they should all
go back to their jobs; the water must flow. And during the October fighting in Moscow, he had only
one concern: to safeguard the water-supply system. His col- leagues went on strike in answer to the
Bolshevik coup d'etat and invited him to take part in the strike with them. His reply was: "On the
operational side, please forgive me, I am not on strike. ... In everything else, I — well, yes, I am on
strike." He accepted money for the strikers from the strike committee, and gave them a receipt, but
he himself dashed off to get a sleeve to repair a broken pipe.

But despite this, he was an enemy! Here's what he had said to one of the workers: "The Soviet
regime won't last two weeks." (There was a new political situation preceding the announcement of
the New Economic Policy, and in this context Krylenko could allow himself some frank talk before
the Verkhtrib: "It was not only the spetsy who thought that way at the time. That is what we
ourselves thought more than once. ")

But despite this, Oldenborger was an enemy! Just as Comrade Lenin had told us: to keep watch over
the bourgeois specialists we need a watchdog — the RKI — the Workers' and Peasants' Inspection.

They began by assigning two such watchdogs to Oldenborger on a full-time basis. (One of them,
Makarov-Zemlyansky, a swindler and a former clerk in the water system, had been fired "for
improper conduct" and had entered the service of the RKI "because they paid better." He got
promoted to the Central People's Commissariat because "the pay there was even better"- and, from
that height, he had returned to check up on his former chief and take hearty vengeance on the man
who had wronged him.) Then, of course, the local Party committee — that match- less defender of the
workers' interests — wasn't dozing either. And Communists were put in charge of the water system.
"Only workers are to hold the top positions; there are to be only Communists at leadership level; and
the wisdom of this view was confirmed by the given trial."

The Moscow Party organization also kept its eyes on the water- supply system. (And behind it stood
the Cheka.) "In our own time we built our army on the basis of a healthy feeling of class enmity; in
its name, we do not entrust even one responsible posi- tion to people who do not belong to our camp,
without assigning them ... a commissar." And so, they all immediately began to order the chief
engineer about, to supervise him, to give him instructions, and to shift the engineering personnel
around with- out his knowledge. ("They broke up the whole nest of business- men.")

But they did not, even so, safeguard the water-supply system. Things didn't go better with it, but
worse! So slyly had that gang of engineers contrived to carry out an evil scheme. Even more:
overcoming his intellectual's interim nature, as a result of which he had never in his life expressed
himself sharply, Oldenborger made so bold as to describe as stupid stubbornness the actions of the
new chief of the water-supply system, Zenyuk (to Kry- lenko, "a profoundly likable person on the
basis of his internal structure").

It was at this point that it became clear that "engineer Olden- borger was consciously betraying the
interests of the workers and that he was a direct and open enemy of the dictatorship of the working
class." They started bringing inspection commissions into the water-supply system, but the
commissions found that everything was in good order and that water was being supplied on a normal
basis. The RKI men, the "rabkrinovtsy," refused to be satisfied with this. They kept pouring report
after report into the RKI. Oldenborger simply wanted to "ruin, spoil, break down the water-supply
system for political purposes," but he was unable to. Well, they put what obstacles in his way that
they could; they prevented wasteful boiler repairs and replacing the wooden tanks with concrete
ones. At meetings of the water-supply-system workers, the leaders began saying openly that their
chief engineer was the "soul of organized technical sabotage" and that he should not be believed, that
he should be resisted at every point.

Despite all this, the operation of the water-supply system not only didn't improve, but deteriorated.



What was particularly offensive to the "hereditary proletarian psychology" of the officials of the
Workers' and Peasants' Inspec- tion and of the trade unions was that the majority of the workers at
the pumping stations "had been infected with petty-bourgeois psychology" and, unable to recognize
Oldenborger's sabotage, had come to his defense. At this point, elections to the Moscow Soviet were
being held and the workers nominated Oldenborger as the candidate of the water-supply system,
against whom, of course, the Party cell backed its own Party candidate. However, this turned out to
be futile because of the chief engineer's fraudulent authority with the workers. Nonetheless, the Party
cell brought up the question with the District Party Committee, on all levels, and announced at a
general meeting that "Oldenborger is the center and soul of sabotage, and will be our political enemy
in the Moscow Soviet!" The workers responded with an uproar and shouts of "Untrue! Lies!" And at
that point the secretary of the Party Committee, Comrade Sedelnikov, flung right in the faces of the
thousand-headed proletariat there: "I am not even going to talk to such Black Hundred, reactionary
pogrom-makers." That is to say: We'll talk to you somewhere else.

Party measures were also taken: they expelled the chief engineer from — no less — the collegium for
administration of the water system, and kept him under constant investigation; con- tinually
summoned him before a multitude of commissions and subcommissions; kept interrogating him and
giving him as- signments that were to be urgently carried out. Every time he failed to appear, it was
entered in the record "in case of a future trial." And through the Council of Labor and Defense
(Chair- man — Comrade Lenin) they got an "Extraordinary Troika" appointed to the water system. (It
consisted of representatives of the RKI, the Council of Trade Unions, and Comrade Kuibyshev.)

And for the fourth year the water kept right on flowing through the pipes. And Moscovites kept on
drinking it and didn't notice anything wrong.

Then Comrade Sedelnikov wrote an article for the newspaper Ekonotnicheskaya Zhizn: "In view of
the rumors disturbing the public in regard to the catastrophic state of the water mains ..." and he
reported many new and alarming rumors — even that the water system was pumping water
underground and was intention- ally washing away the foundations of all Moscow. " (Set there by
Ivan Kalita in the fourteenth century.) They summoned a Commission of the Moscow Soviet. The
Commission found that the "state of the water system was satisfactory and that its techni- cal
direction was efficient." Oldenborger denied all the accusa- tions. And then Sedelnikov placidly
declared: "I had set myself the task of stirring up a fuss about this matter in order to get the question
of the spetsy taken up."

What remained for the leaders of the workers to do at this point? What was the final, infallible
method? A denunciation to the Cheka! Sedelnikov resorted to just that! He "painted a picture of the
conscious wrecking of the water system by Oldenborger." He did not have the slightest doubt that "a
counterrevolutionary organization" existed "in the water system, in the heart of Red Moscow." And,
furthermore, a catastrophic situation at the Ruble vo water tower!

At this point, Oldenborger was guilty of a tactless act of rude- ness, the outburst of a spineless,
interim intellectual. They had refused to authorize his order for new boilers from abroad — and at the
time, in Russia, it was quite impossible to fix the old ones. So Oldenborger committed suicide. (It
had been just too much for one man — after all, he hadn't undergone the condition- ing for that sort of
thing.)

The cause was not lost, however. They could find a counter- revolutionary organization without him.
RKI men would now undertake to expose the whole thing. Some concealed maneuver- ing went on
for two months. But such was the spirit at the beginning of the NEP that "a lesson had to be taught
both one side and the other." So there was a trial in the Supreme Tribunal. Krylenko was moderately
severe. Krylenko was moderately merci- less. He was understanding: "The Russian worker, of
course, was right to see in every person not of his own class someone more likely to be an enemy
than a friend." Nevertheless: "Given the further change in our practical and general policy, perhaps



we must be prepared for still greater concessions, for retreating and maneuvering. Perhaps the Party
will be forced to adopt a tactical program of action which the primitive logic of honest, dedicated
warriors is going to protest."

Well, it's a fact, the workers who testified against Comrade Sedelnikov and the RKI men were
"easily brushed off" by the tribunal. And the defendant Sedelnikov replied brazenly to the threats of
the accuser. "Comrade Krylenko! I know all those articles. But after all, no one is judging class
enemies here, and those articles relate to class enemies."

However, Krylenko laid it on good and thick. Deliberately false denunciations to state institutions ...
in circumstances aggravating guilt, such as a personal grudge and the settling of personal accounts ...
the abuse of an official position . . . political irresponsibility . . . abuse of power and of the authority
of govern- ment officials and members of the Russian Communist Party (Bolsheviks) . . .
disorganization of the work of the water- supply system . . . injury done the Moscow Soviet and
Soviet Russia, because there were few such specialists, and it was im- possible to find replacements
for them. "And we won't even begin to speak of the individual, personal loss. ... In our time, when
struggle is the chief content of our lives, we have somehow grown used to not counting these
irrevocable losses." The Supreme Revolutionary Tribunal must utter its weighty word: "Punishment
must be assessed with all due severity! . . . We didn't come here just to crack jokes."

Good Lord, now what are they going to get? Could it really be? My reader has gotten used to
prompting: all of them to be sh

And that is absolutely correct. All of them were to be publicly shamed — bearing in mind their
sincere repentance! All of them to be sentenced to — ostracism and ridicule.

Two truths . . .

And Sedelnikov, allegedly, got one year in jail.
You will just have to forgive me if I don't believe it.

Oh, you bards of the twenties, painting your pictures of their bright and bubbling happiness! Even
those who touched only their farthest edge, who touched them only in childhood, will never forget
them. And those plug-uglies, those fat faces, busy per- secuting engineers — in the twenties, too, they
ate their bellies full. And now we see also that they had been busy from 1918 on. In the two trials
following we will take leave of our favorite supreme accuser for a while: he is occupied with his
preparations for the major trial of the SR's.

[The provincial trials of the SR's took place even earlier, such as the one in Saratov in 1919.]

This spectacular trial aroused a great deal of emotion in Europe beforehand, and the People's
Commissariat of Justice was suddenly taken aback: after all, we had been trying people for four
years without any code, neither a new one nor an old one. And in all probability Krylenko him- self
was concerned about the code too. Everything had to be neatly tied up ahead of time.

The coming church trials were internal. They didn't interest progressive Europe. And they could be
conducted without a code.

We have already had an opportunity to observe that the separa- tion of church and state was so
construed by the state that the churches themselves and everything that hung in them, was in- stalled
in them and painted in them, belonged to the state, and the only church remaining was that church
which, in accordance with the Scriptures, lay within the heart. And in 1918, when political victory
seemed to have been attained faster and more easily than had been expected, they had pressed right



on to con- fiscate church property. However, this leap had aroused too fierce a wave of popular
indignation. In the heat of the Civil War, it was not very intelligent to create, in addition, an internal
front against the believers. And it proved necessary to postpone for the time being the dialogue
between the Communists and the Christians.

At the end of the Civil War, and as its natural consequence, an unprecedented famine developed in
the Volga area. They give it only two lines in the official histories because it doesn't add a very
ornamental touch to the wreaths of the victors in that war. But the famine existed nonetheless — to
the point of cannibalism, to the point at which parents ate their own children — such a famine as even
Russia had never known, even in the Time of Troubles in the early seventeenth century. (Because at
that time, as the historians testify, unthreshed ricks of grain survived intact beneath the snow and ice
for several years.) Just one film about famine might throw a new light on everything we saw and
everything we know about the Revolution and the Civil War. But there are no films and no novels
and no statistical re- search — the effort is to forget it. It does not embellish. Besides, we have come
to blame the kulaks as the cause of every famine — and just who were the kulaks in the midst of such
collective death? V. G. Korolenko, in his Letters to Lunacharsky (which, despite Lunacharsky's
promise, were never officially published in the Soviet Union), explains to us Russia's total, epidemic
descent into famine and destitution.

[Published in Paris in 1922, and in the Soviet Union in samizdat in 1967.]

It was the result of productivity having been reduced to zero (the working hands were all carrying
guns) and the result, also, of the peasants' utter lack of trust and hope that even the smallest part of
the harvest might be left for them. Yes, and someday someone will also count up those many
carloads of food supplies rolling on and on for many, many months to Imperial Germany, under the
terms of the peace treaty of Brest-Litovsk — from a Russia which had been deprived of a protesting
voice, from the very provinces where famine would strike — so that Germany could fight to the end
in the West.

There was a direct, immediate chain of cause and effect. The Volga peasants had to eat their children
because we were so impatient about putting up with the Constituent Assembly.

But political genius lies in extracting success even from the people's ruin. A brilliant idea was bom:
after all, three billiard balls can be pocketed with one shot. So now let the priests feed the Volga
region! They are Christians. They are generous!

1. If they refuse, we will blame the whole famine on them and destroy the church.

2. If they agree, we will clean out the churches.

3. In either case, we will replenish our stocks of foreign ex- change and precious metals.

Yes, and the idea was probably inspired by the actions of the church itself. As Patriarch Tikhon
himself had testified, back in August, 1921, at the beginning of the famine, the church had created
diocesan and all-Russian committees for aid to the starv- ing and had begun to collect funds. But to
have permitted any direct help to go straight from the church into the mouths of those who were
starving would have undermined the dictatorship of the proletariat. The committees were banned,
and the funds they had collected were confiscated and turned over to the state treasury. The Patriarch
had also appealed to the Pope in Rome and to the Archbishop of Canterbury for assistance — but he
was rebuked for this, too, on the grounds that only the Soviet au- thorities had the right to enter into
discussions with foreigners. Yes, indeed. And what was there to be alarmed about? The news- papers
wrote that the government itself had all the necessary means to cope with the famine.

Meanwhile, in the Volga region they were eating grass, the soles of shoes, and gnawing at door



jambs. And, finally, in Decern- ber, 1921, Pomgol — the State Commission for Famine Relief —
proposed that the churches help the starving by donating church valuables — not all, but those not
required for liturgical rites. The Patriarch agreed. Pomgol issued a directive: all gifts must be strictly
voluntary! On Febraury 19, 1922, the Patriarch issued a pastoral letter permitting the parish councils
to make gifts of objects that did not have liturgical and ritual significance.

And in this way matters could again have simply degenerated into a compromise that would have
frustrated the will of the proletariat, just as it once had been by the Constituent Assembly, and still
was in all the chatterbox European parliaments.

The thought came in a stroke of lightning! The thought came — and a decree followed! A decree of
the All-Russian Central Execu- tive Committee on February 26: all valuables were to be requisi-
tioned from the churches — for the starving!

The Patriarch wrote to Kalinin, who did not reply. Then on February 28 the Patriarch issued a new,
fateful pastoral letter: from the church's point of view such a measure is sacrilege, and we cannot
approve the requisition.

From the distance of a half-century, it is easy to reproach the Patriarch. Of course, the leaders of the
Christian church ought not to have been distracted by wondering whether other resources might not
be available to the Soviet government, and who it was who had driven the Volga to famine. They
ought not to have clung to those treasures, since the possibility of a new fortress of faith arising — if
it existed at all — did not depend on them. But one has also to picture the situation of that unfortunate
Patriarch, not elected to his post until after the October Revolution, who had for a few short years led
a church that was always persecuted, restricted, under fire, and whose preservation had been
entrusted to him.

But right then and there a sure-fire campaign of persecution began in the papers, directed against the
Patriarch and high church authorities who were strangling the Volga region with the bony hand of
famine. And the more firmly the Patriarch clung to his position, the weaker it became. In March a
movement to re- linquish the valuables, to come to an agreement with the govern- ment, began even
among the clergy. Their still undispelled qualms were expressed to Kalinin by Bishop Antonin
Granovsky, a mem- ber of the Central Committee of Pomgol: "The believers fear that the church
valuables may be used for other purposes, more limited and alien to their hearts." (Knowing the
general principles of our Progressive Doctrine, the experienced reader will agree that this was indeed
very probable. After all, the Comintern's needs and those of the East in the course of being liberated
were no less acute than those of the Volga.)

The Petrograd Metropolitan, Veniamin, was similarly impelled by a mood of trust: "This belongs to
God and we will give all of it by ourselves." But forced requisitions were wrong. Let the sacrifice be
of our own free will. He, too, wanted verification by the clergy and the believers: to watch over the
church valuables up to the very moment when they were transformed into bread for the starving.
And in all this he was tormented lest he violate the censuring will of the Patriarch.

In Petrograd things seemed to be working out peacefully. The atmosphere at the session of the
Petrograd Pomgol on March 5, 1922, was even joyful, according to the testimony of an eye- witness.
Veniamin announced: "The Orthodox Church is pre- pared to give everything to help the starving." It
saw sacrilege only in forced requisition. But in that case requisition was un- necessary! Kanatchikov,
Chairman of the Petrograd Pomgol, gave his assurances that this would produce a favorable attitude
toward the church on the part of the Soviet government. (Not very likely, that!) In a burst of good
feeling, everyone stood up. The Metropolitan said: "The heaviest burden is division and enmity. But
the time will come when the Russian people will unite. I myself, at the head of the worshipers, will
remove the cover [of precious metals and precious stones] from the ikon of the Holy Virgin of
Kazan. I will shed sweet tears on it and give it away." He gave his blessing to the Bolshevik



members of Pomgol and they saw him to the door with bared heads. The newspaper Petrogradskaya
Pravda, in its issues of March 8, 9, and 10, confirmed the peaceful, successful outcome of the talks,
and spoke favorably of the Metropolitan.

[See the articles entitled "Tserkov i Golod" ("The Church and the Famine") and "Kakbudut izyaty
tserkovnye tsennosti" ("How the Church Valuables Will Be Requisitioned").]

"In Smolny they agreed that the church vessels and ikon coverings would be melted down into ingots
in the presence of the believers."

Again things were getting fouled up with some kind of com- promise! The noxious fumes of
Christianity were poisoning the revolutionary will. That kind o/ unity and that way o/handing over
the valuables were not what the starving people of the Volga needed! The spineless membership of
the Petrograd Pomgol was changed. The newspapers began to howl about the "evil pastors" and
"princes of the church," and the representatives of the church were told: "We don't need your
donations! And there won't be any negotiations with you! Everything belongs to the government —
and the government will take whatever it considers necessary."

And so forcible requisitions, accompanied by strife, began in Petrograd, as they did everywhere else.
And this provided the legal basis for initiating trials of the clergy.

[I have taken this material from Ocherki po Istorii Tserkovnoi Smuty ( Essays on the History of the
Troubles of the Church), by Anatoly Levitin, Part I, samizdat, 1962, and from the stenographic notes
on the questioning of Patriarch Tikhon, Trial Record, Vol. V.]

H. The Moscow Church Trial— April 26-May 7, 1922

This took place in the Polytechnic Museum. The court was the Moscow Revtribunal, under Presiding
Judge Bek; the prosecutors were Lunin and Longinov. There were seventeen defendants, including
archpriests and laymen, accused of disseminating the Patriarch's proclamation. This charge was more
important than the question of surrendering, or not surrendering, church valu- ables. Archpriest A. N.
Zaozersky had surrendered all the valuables in his own church, but he defended in principle the
Patriarch's appeal regarding forced requisition as sacrilege, and he became the central personage in
the trial — and would shortly be shot. (All of which went to prove that what was important was not to
feed the starving but to make use of a convenient opportu- nity to break the back of the church.)

On May 5 Patriarch Tikhon was summoned to the tribunal as a witness. Even though the public was
represented only by a carefully selected audience (1922, in this respect, differing little from 1937 and
1968), nonetheless the stamp of Old Russia was still so deep, and the Soviet stamp was still so
superficial, that on the Patriarch's entrance more than half of those present rose to receive his
blessing.

Tikhon took on himself the entire blame for writing and dis- seminating his appeal. The presiding
judge of the tribunal tried to elicit a different line of testimony from him: "But it isn't pos- sible! Did
you really write it in your own hand? All the lines? You probably just signed it. And who actually
wrote it? And who were your advisers?" and then: "Why did you mention in the appeal the
persecution to which the newspapers are subjecting you? [After all, they are persecuting you and
why should we hear about it?] What did you want to express?"

The Patriarch: "That is something you will have to ask the people who started the persecution: What
objectives were they pursuing?"

The Presiding Judge: "But that after all has nothing to do with religion!"



The Patriarch: "It has historical significance."

The Presiding Judge: "Referring to the fact that the decree was published while you were in the
midst of talks with Pomgol, you used the expression, behind your back?"

The Patriarch: "Yes."

Presiding Judge: "You therefore consider that the Soviet gov- emment acted incorrectly?"

A crushing argument! It will be repeated a million times more in the nighttime offices of
interrogators! And we will never answer as simply and straightforwardly as:

The Patriarch: "Yes."

The Presiding Judge: "Do you consider the state's laws ob- ligatory or not?"

The Patriarch: "Yes, I recognize them, to the extent that they do not contradict the rules of piety."

(Oh, if only everyone had answered just that way! Our whole history would have been different.)

A debate about church law followed. The Patriarch explained that if the church itself surrendered its
valuables, it was not sacrilege. But if they were taken away against the church's will, it was. His
appeal had not prohibited giving the valuables at all, but had only declared that seizing them against
the will of the church was to be condemned.

(But that's what we wanted — expropriation against the will of the church!)

Comrade Bek, the presiding judge, was astounded: "Which in the last analysis is more important to
you — the laws of the church or the point of view of the Soviet government?"

(The expected reply: "The Soviet government.")

"Very well; so it was sacrilege according to the laws of the church," exclaimed the accuser, "but
what was it from the point of view of mercy?"

(For the first and last time — for another fifty years — that banal word mercy was spoken before a
tribunal.)

Then there was a philological analysis of the word "svyato- tatstvo," meaning "sacrilege," derived
from "svyato," meaning "holy," and "tat," meaning "thief."

The Accuser: "So that means that we, the representatives of the Soviet government, are thieves of
holy things?"

(A prolonged uproar in the hall. A recess. The bailiffs at work.)

The Accuser: "So you call the representatives of the Soviet government, the All-Russian Central
Executive Committee, thieves?"

The Patriarch: "I am citing only church law."

Then there is a discussion of the term "blasphemy." While they were requisitioning the valuables
from the church of St. Basil the Great of Caesarea, the ikon cover would not fit into a box, and at that



point they trampled it with their feet. But the Patri- arch himself had not been present.

The Accuser: "How do you know that? Give us the name o/the priest who told you that. [And we
will arrest him immedi- ately!]"

The Patriarch does not give the name.

That means it was a lie!

The Accuser presses on triumphantly: "No, who spread that repulsive slander?"

The Presiding Judge: "Give us the names of those who trampled the ikon cover! [One can assume
that after doing it they left their visiting cards!] Otherwise the tribunal cannot believe you!"

The Patriarch cannot name them.

The Presiding Judge: "That means you have made an unsub- stantiated assertion."

It still remained to be proved that the Patriarch wanted to overthrow the Soviet government. And
here is how it was proved:

"Propaganda is an attempt to prepare a mood preliminary to preparing a revolt in the future."
The tribunal ordered criminal charges to be brought against the Patriarch.

On May 7 sentence was pronounced: of the seventeen defen- dants, eleven were to be shot. (They
actually shot five.)

As Krylenko said: "We didn't come here just to crack jokes."

One week later the Patriarch was removed from office and arrested. (But this was not the very end.
For the time being he was taken to the Donskoi Monastery and kept there in strict in- carceration, so
that the believers would grow accustomed to his absence. Remember how just a short while before
Krylenko had been astonished: what danger could possibly threaten the Patri- arch? Truly, when the
danger really does come, there's no help for it, either in alarm bells or in telephone calls.)

Two weeks after that, the Metropolitan Veniamin was arrested in Petrograd. He had not been a high

official of the church before the Revolution. Nor had he even been appointed, like almost all
Metropolitans. In the spring of 1917, for the first time since the days of ancient Novgorod the Great,
they had elected a Metro- politan in Moscow and in Petrograd. A gentle, simple, easily accessible
man, a frequent visitor in factories and mills, popular with the people and with the lower clergy,
Veniamin had been elected by their votes. Not understanding the times, he had seen as his task the
liberation of the church from politics "because it had suffered much from politics in the past." This
was the Metro- politan who was tried in:

I. The Petrograd Church Trial— June 9- July 5, 1922

The defendants, charged with resisting the requisition of church valuables, numbered several dozen
in all, including a professor of theology and church law, archimandrites, priests, and laymen.
Semyonov, the presiding judge of the tribunal, was twenty-five years old and, according to rumor,
had formerly been a baker. The chief accuser was a member of the collegium of the People's
Commissariat of Justice, P. A. Krasikov — a man of Lenin's age and a friend of Lenin when he was in
exile in the Krasnoyarsk region and, later on, in emigration as well. Vladimir Ilyich used to enjoy
hearing him play the violin.



Out on Nevsky Prospekt, and at the Nevsky turn-off, a dense crowd waited every day of the trial, and
when the Metropolitan was driven past, many of them knelt down and sang: "Save, O Lord, thy
people!" (It goes without saying that they arrested overzealous believers right on the street and in the
court building also.) Most of the spectators in the court were Red Army men, but even they rose
every time the Metropolitan entered in his white ecclesiastical hood. Yet the accuser and the tribunal
called him an enemy of the people. Let us note that this term already existed.

From trial to trial, things closed in on the defense lawyers, and their humiliating predicament was
already very apparent. Kry- lenko tells us nothing about this, but the gap is closed by an eye-
witness. The tribunal roared out a threat to arrest Bobrishchev- Pushkin himself — the principal
defense lawyer — and this was already so in accord with the spirit of the times, and the threat was so
real that Bobrishchev-Pushkin made haste to hand over his gold watch and his billfold to lawyer
Gurovich. And right then and there the tribunal actually ordered the imprisonment of a witness.
Professor Yegorov, because of his testimony on behalf of the Metropolitan. As it turned out,
Yegorov was quite pre- pared for this. He had a thick briefcase with him in which he had packed
food, underwear, and even a small blanket.

The reader can observe that the court was gradually assuming forms familiar to us.

Metropolitan Veniamin was accused of entering, with evil intent, into an agreement with ... the

Soviet government, no less, and thereby obtaining a relaxation of the decree on the requisition of
valuables. It was charged that his appeal to Pomgol had been maliciously disseminated among the
people. (Samizdat! — self -publication!) And he had also acted in concert with the world bourgeoisie.

Priest Krasnitsky, one of the principal "Living Church" schis- matics, and GPU collaborator, testified
that the priests had con- spired to provoke a revolt against the Soviet government on the grounds of
famine.

The only witnesses heard were those of the prosecution. De- fense witnesses were not permitted to
testify. (Oh, how familiar it all is! More and more!)

Accuser Smimov demanded "sixteen heads." Accuser Krasikov cried out: "The whole Orthodox
Church is a subversive organiza- tion. Properly speaking, the entire church ought to be put in
prison."

(This was a very realistic program. Soon it was almost realized. And it was a good basis for a
dialogue.)

Let us make use of a rather rare opportunity to cite several sentences that have been preserved from
the speech of S. Y. Gurovich, who was the Metropolitan's defense attorney.

"There are no proofs of guilt. There are no facts. There is not even an indictment. . . . What will
history say? [Oh, he certainly had discovered how to frighten them! History will forget and say
nothing!] The requisition of church valuables in Petrograd took place in a complete calm, but here
the Petrograd clergy is on the defendants' bench, and somebody's hands keep pushing them toward
death. The basic principle which you stress is the good of the Soviet government. But do not forget
that the church will be nourished by the blood of martyrs. [Not in the Soviet Union, though!] There
is nothing more to be said, but it is hard to stop talking. While the debate lasts, the defendants are
alive. When the debate comes to an end, life will end too."

The tribunal condemned ten of them to death. They waited more than a month for their execution,
until the trial of the SR's had ended. (It was as though they had processed them in order to shoot
them at the same time as the SR's.) And after that, VTsIK, the AU-Russian Central Executive
Committee, pardoned six of them. And four of them — the Metropolitan Veniamin; the



Archimandrite Sergius, a former member of the State Duma; Professor of Law Y. P. Novitsky; and
the barrister Kovsharov — were shot on the night of August 12-13.

We insistently urge our readers not to forget the principle of provincial multiplicity. Where two
church trials were held in Moscow and Petrograd, there were twenty -two in the provinces.

They were in a big hurry to produce a Criminal Code in time for the trial of the SR's — the Socialist
Revolutionaries. The time had come to set in place the granite foundation stones of the Law. On May
12, as had been agreed, the session of VTsIK convened, but the projected Code had not yet been
completed. It had only just been delivered for analysis to Vladimir llyich Lenin at his Gorki estate
outside Moscow. Six articles of the Code provided for execution by shooting as the maximum
punishment. This was unsatisfactory. On May 15, on the margins of the draft Code, Lenin added six
more articles requiring execution by shooting (including — under Article 69 — propaganda and
agitation, par- ticularly in the form of an appeal for passive resistance to the government and mass
rejection of the obligations of military service or tax payments).

[In other words, like the Vyborg appeal, for which the Tsar's government had imposed sentences of
three months' imprisonment.]

And one other crime that called for execution by shooting: unauthorized return from abroad (my,
how the socialists all used to bob back and forth incessantly!). And there was one punishment that
was the equivalent of execu- tion by shooting: exile abroad. Vladimir llyich foresaw a time not far
distant when there would be a constant rush of people to the Soviet Union from Europe, and it would
be impossible to get anyone voluntarily to leave the Soviet Union for the West. Lenin went on to
express his principal conclusion to the People's Commissar of Justice:

"Comrade Kursky! In my opinion we ought to extend the use of execution by shooting (allowing the
substitution of exile abroad) to all activities of the Mensheviks, SR's, etc. We ought to find a
formulation that would connect these activities with the international bourgeoisie." (Lenin's italics.)

To extend the use of execution by shooting! Nothing left to the imagination there! (And did they exile
very many?) Terror is a method of persuasion. This, too, could hardly be misunderstood.

But Kursky, nonetheless, still didn't get the whole idea. In all probability, what he couldn't quite
work out was a way of formu- lating that formulation, a way of working in that very matter of
connection. The next day, he called on the Chairman of the Council of People's Commissars, Lenin,
for clarification. We have no way of knowing what took place during their conversation. But
following it up, on May 17, Lenin sent a second letter from Gorki:

COMRADE KURSKY!

As a sequel to our conversation, I am sending you an outline of a supplementary paragraph for

the Criminal Code The basic concept, I hope, is clear, notwithstanding all the

shortcomings of the rough draft: openly to set forth a statute which is both principled and
politically truthful (and not just juridically narrow) to supply the motivation for the essence
and the justification of terror, its necessity, its limits.

The court must not exclude terror. It would be self-deception or deceit to promise this, and in
order to provide it with a foundation and to legalize it in a principled way, clearly and without
hypocrisy and without embellishment, it is necessary to formulate it as broadly as possible, for
only revolutionary righteousness and a revolutionary conscience will provide the conditions for
applying it more or less broadly in practice.



With Communist greetings.



LENIN



We will not undertake to comment on this important docu- ment. What it calls for is silence and
reflection.

The document is especially important because it was one of Lenin's last directives on this earth — he
had not yet fallen ill — and an important part of his political testament. Ten days after this letter, he
suffered his first stroke, from which he recovered only incompletely and temporarily in the autumn
months of 1922. Perhaps both letters to Kursky were written in that light and airy white marble
boudoir-study at the comer of the second floor, where the future deathbed of the leader already stood
waiting.

Attached to this letter is the rough draft mentioned in it, con- taining two versions of the
supplementary paragraph, out of which would grow in a few years' time both Article 58-4 and all of
our dear little old mother. Article 58. You read it and you are carried away with admiration: that's
what it really means to formulate it as broadly as possible! That's what is meant by extending its use.
You read and you recollect how broad was the embrace of that dear little old mother.

". . . propaganda or agitation, or participation in an organiza- tion, or assistance (objectively assisting
or being capable of assist- ing) . . . organizations or persons whose activity has the charac- ter ..."

Hand me St. Augustine, and in a trice I can find room in that article for him too.

Everything was inserted as required; it was retyped; execution by shooting was extended — and the
session of the AU-Russian Central Executive Committee adopted the new Criminal Code shortly
after May 20 and decreed it to be in effect from June 1, 1922, on.

And so began, on the most legal basis, the two-month-long

J. Trial of the SR's— June 8-August 7, 1922

The court was the Supreme Tribunal, the Verkhtrib. The usual presiding judge. Comrade Karklin (a
good name for a judge- derived from the word meaning to "croak" or "caw"), was re- placed for this
important trial, which was being watched closely by the entire socialist world, by the resourceful
Georgi Pyatakov. (Provident fate enjoys its little jokes — but it also leaves us time to think things
over! It left Pyatakov fifteen years.) There were no defense lawyers. The defendants, all leading
SR's, undertook their own defense. Pyatakov bore himself harshly, and interfered with the
defendants' having their say.

If my readers and I were not already sufficiently informed to know that what was important in every
trial was not the charges brought nor guilt, so called, but expediency, we would perhaps not be
prepared to accept this trial wholeheartedly. But expedi- ency works without fail: the SR's, as
opposed to the Mensheviks, were considered still dangerous, not yet dispersed and broken up, not yet
finished off. And on behalf of the fortress of the newly created dictatorship (the proletariat), it was
expedient to finish them off.

Someone unfamiliar with this principle might mistakenly view the entire trial as an act of Party
vengeance.

Involuntarily one ponders the charges set forth in this trial, placing them in the perspective of the
long-drawn-out and still unfolding history of nations. With the exception of a very limited number of
parliamentary democracies, during a very limited number of decades, the history of nations is
entirely a history of revolutions and seizures of power. And whoever succeeds in making a more
successful and more enduring revolution is from that moment on graced with the bright robes of



Justice, and his every past and future step is legalized and memorialized in odes, whereas every past
and future step of his unsuccessful enemies is criminal and subject to arraignment and a legal
penalty.

The Criminal Code had been adopted only one week earlier, but five whole years of
postrevolutionary experience had been compressed into it. Twenty, ten, and five years earlier, the
SR's had been the party next door in the effort to overthrow Tsarism, the party which had chiefly
taken upon itself, thanks to the particular character of its terrorist tactics, the burden of hard- labor
imprisonment, which had scarcely touched the Bolsheviks.

Now the first charge against them was that the SR's had in- itiated the Civil War! Yes, they began it,
they had begun it. They were accused of armed resistance to the October seizure of power. When the
Provisional Government, which they supported and which was in part made up of their members,
was lawfully swept out of office by the machine-gun fire of the sailors, the SR's tried altogether
illegally to defend it, and even returned shot for shot, and even called into battle the military cadets
of that deposed government.

[The fact that their efforts in defending it were very feeble, that they were beset by hesitations, and
that they renounced it right away is another matter. For all that, their guilt was no less.]

Defeated in battle, they did not repent politically. They did not get down on their knees to the
Council of People's Com- missars, which had declared itself to be the government. They continued
to insist stubbornly that the only legal government was the one which had been overthrown. They
refused to admit right away that what had been their political line for twenty years was a failure,
[And it had indeed been a failure, although this did not become clear immediately.] and they did not
ask to be pardoned, nor to have their party dissolved and cease to be considered a party.

[In the same way, all the local Russian governments, and those in outly- ing areas, were illegal —

those in Archangel, Samara, Ufa or Omsk, the Ukraine, the Don, the Kuban, the Urals or
Transcaucasia — inasmuch as they all de- clared themselves to be governments after the Council of
People's Commissars had declared itself to be the government.]

The second charge against them was that they had deepened the abyss of the Civil War by taking
part in demonstrations — by this token, rebellions — on January 5 and 6, 1918, against the lawful
authority of the workers' and peasants' government. They were supporting their illegal Constituent
Assembly (elected by universal, free, equal, secret, and direct voting) against the sailors and the Red
Guards, who legally dispersed both the Assembly and the demonstrators. (And what good could have
come of peaceable sessions of the Constituent Assembly? Only the con- flagration of a three-year-
long Civil War. And that is why the Civil War began, because not all the people submitted simul-
taneously and obediently to the lawful decrees of the Council of People's Commissars.)

The third charge was that they had not recognized the peace treaty of Brest-Litovsk, that lawful,
Ufesaving peace of Brest- Litovsk, which had cut off not Russia's head but only parts of its torso. By
this token, declared the official indictment, there were present "all the signs of high treason and
criminal activity directed to drawing the country into war."

High treason! That is another club with two ends. It all de- pends on which end you have hold of.

From this followed the serious fourth charge: in the summer and fall of 1918, those final months and
weeks when the Kaiser's Germany was scarcely managing to hold its own against the Allies, and the
Soviet government, faithful to the Brest treaty, was supporting Germany in its difficult struggle with
trainloads of foodstuffs and a monthly tribute in gold, the SR's traitorously prepared (well, they
didn't actually prepare anything but, as was their custom, did more talking about it than anything —
but what if they really had!) to blow up the railroad tracks in front of one such train, thus keeping the



gold in the Motherland. In other words, they "prepared criminal destruction of our public wealth, the
railroads."

(At that time the Communists were not yet ashamed of and did not conceal the fact that, yes, indeed,
Russian gold had been shipped off to Hitler's future empire, and it didn't seem to dawn on Krylenko
despite his study in two academic departments — history and law — nor did any of his assistants
whisper the notion to him, that if steel rails are public wealth, then maybe gold ingots are too?)

From this fourth charge a fifth followed inexorably: the SR's had intended to procure the technical
equipment for such an explosion with money received from Allied representatives. (They had
wanted to take money from the Entente in order not to give gold away to Kaiser Wilhelm.) And this
was the extreme of treason! (Just in case, Krylenko did mutter something about the SR's also having
connections with Ludendorff s General Staff, but this stone had indeed landed in the wrong vegetable
garden, and he quickly dropped the whole thing.)

From this it was only a very short step to the sixth charge: that the SR's had been Entente spies in
1918. Yesterday they had been revolutionaries, and today they were spies. At the time, this
accusation probably sounded explosive. But since then, and after many, many trials, the whole thing
makes one want to vomit.

Well, then, the seventh and tenth points concerned coUabora- tion with Savinkov, or Filonenko, or
the Cadets, or the "Union of Rebirth" (had it really ever existed?), and even with aristocratic,
reactionary, dilettante — so-called "white-lining" — students, or even the White Guards.

This series of linked charges was well expounded by the prose- cutor.

[The title of "prosecutor" had by now been restored to him.]

As a result of either hard thinking in his office, or a sudden stroke of genius on the rostrum, he
managed in this trial to come up with that tone of heartfelt sympathy and friendly criticism which he
would make use of in subsequent trials with increasing self-assurance and in ever heavier doses, and
which, in 1937, would result in dazzling success. This tone created a com- mon ground — against the
rest of the world — between those doing the judging and those who were being judged, and it played
on the defendant's particular soft spot. From the prosecutor's ros- trum, they said to the SR's: "After
all, you and we are revolu- tionaries! [We! You and we — that adds up to us!] And how could you
have fallen so low as to join with the Cadets? [Yes, no doubt your heart is breaking!] Or with the
officers? Or to teach the aristocratic, reactionary, dilettante students your brilliantly worked-out
scheme of conspiratorial operation?"

None of the defendants' replies is available to us. Did any of them point out that the particular

characteristic of the October coup had been to declare war immediately on all the other parties and
forbid them to join forces? ("They're not hauling you in, so don't you dare peep!") But for some
reason one gets the feeling that some of the defendants sat there with downcast eyes and that some of
them truly had divided hearts: just how could they have fallen so low? After all, for the prisoner
who'd been brought in from a dark cell, the friendly, sympathetic attitude of the prosecutor in the big
bright hall struck home very effectively.

And Krylenko discovered another very, very logical little path which was to prove very useful to
Vyshinsky when he applied it against Kamenev and Bukharin: On entering into an alliance with the
bourgeoisie, you accepted money from them. At first you took it for the cause, only /or the cause,
and in no wise for Party pur- poses. But where is the boundary line? Who can draw that divid- ing
line? After all, isn't the cause a Party cause also? And so you sank to the level — you, the Socialist
Revolutionary Party — of being supported by the bourgeoisie! Where was your revolutionary pride?



A full quota of charges — and then some — had been piled up. And the tribunal could have gone out to
confer and thereupon nailed each of the prisoners with his well-merited execution — but, alas, there
was a big mix-up:

a. Everything the Socialist Revolutionary Party had been ac- cused of related to 1918.

b. Since then, on February 27, 1919, an amnesty had been declared for SR's exclusively, which
pardoned all their past belligerency against the Bolsheviks on the sole stipulation that they would not
continue the struggle into the future.

c. And they had not continued the struggle since that time.

d. And it was now 1922!

How could Krylenko get around that one?

Some thought had been given to this point. When the Socialist International asked the Soviet
government to drop charges and not put its socialist brothers on trial, some thought had been given to
it.

In fact, at the beginning of 1919, in the face of threats from Kolchak and Denikin, the SR's had

renounced their task of revolt against the Bolsheviks and had abandoned all armed struggle against
them. (And to aid their Communist brethren, the Samara SR's had even opened up a section of the
Kolchak front. . . which was, in fact, why the amnesty had been granted.) And right at the trial the
defendant Gendelman, a member of the Central Com- mittee, said: "Give us the chance to make use
of the whole gamut of so-called civil liberties, and we will not break the law." (Give it to them! The
"whole gamut," to boot! What loud-mouths!)

And it wasn't just that they weren't engaged in any opposition: they had recognized the Soviet
government! In other words, they had renounced their former Provisional Government, yes, and the
Constituent Assembly as well. And all they asked was a new election for the Soviets, with freedom
for all parties to engage in electoral campaigning.

Now did you hear that? Did you hear that? That's where the hostile bourgeois beast poked his snout
through. How could we? After all, this is a time of crisis! After all, we are encircled by the enemy.
(And in twenty years' time, and fifty years' time, and a hundred years' time, for that matter, it will be
exactly the same.) And you want freedom for the parties to engage in electoral cam- paigning, you
bastards?

Politically sober people, said Krylenko, could only laugh in reply and shrug their shoulders. It had
been a just decision "im- mediately and by all measures of state suppression to prevent these groups
from conducting propaganda against the govern- ment." And specifically: in reply to the
renunciation by the SR's of armed opposition and to their peaceful proposals, they had put the entire
Central Committee of the Socialist Revolu- tionary Party in prison! (As many of them as they could
catch.)

That's how we do it!

But to keep them in prison — and hadn't it already been three years? — wasn't it necessary to try them?
And what should they be charged with? "This period had not been sufficiently investi- gated in the
pretrial examination," our prosecutor complained.

But in the meanwhile one charge was correct. In that same February, 1919, the SR's had passed a
resolution which they had not put into effect, though in terms of the new Criminal Code that didn't



matter at all: to carry on secret agitation in the ranks of the Red Army in order to induce the soldiers
to refuse to par- ticipate in reprisals against the peasants.

And that was a low-down, foul betrayal of the Revolution — to try to persuade men not to take part in
reprisals.

And they could also be charged with everything that the so- called "Foreign Delegation of the
Central Committee" of the SR's — those prominent SR's who had fled to Europe — had said, writ- ten,
and done (mostly words).

But all that wasn't enough. So here's what they thought up: "Many defendants sitting here would not
deserve to be indicted in the given case, were it not for the charge of having planned terrorist acts."
Allegedly, when the amnesty of 1919 had been published, "none of the leaders of Soviet Justice had
imagined" that the SR's had also planned to use terrorism against the leaders of the Soviet state!
(Well, indeed, who could possibly have im- agined that! The SR's! And terrorism, all of a sudden?
And if it had come to mind, it would have been necessary to include it in the amnesty too! Or else
not accept the gap in the Kolchak front. It was really very, very fortunate indeed that no one had
thought of it. Not until it was needed — then someone thought of it.) So this charge had not been
amnestied (for, after all, struggle was the only offense that had been amnestied). And so Krylenko
could now make the charge!

And, in all likelihood, they had discovered so very much! So very much!

In the first place, they had discovered what the SR leaders had said back in the first days after the
October seizure of power.

[And what hadn't those chatterboxes said in the course of a lifetime?]

Chernov, at the Fourth Congress of the SR's, had said that the Party would "counterpose all its forces
against any attack on the rights of the people, as it had" under Tsarism. (And everyone remembered
how it had done that.) Gots had said. "If the auto- crats at Smolny also infringe on the Constituent
Assembly ... the Socialist Revolutionary Party will remember its old tried and true tactics."

Perhaps it did remember, but it didn't make up its mind to act. Yet apparently it could be tried for it
anyway.

"In this area of our investigation," Krylenko complained, be- cause of conspiracy "there will be little
testimony from witnesses." And he continued: "This has made my task extremely difficult. ... In
this area [i.e., terrorism] it is necessary, at certain moments, to wander about in the shadows. "24

What made Krylenko's task difficult was the fact that the use of terrorism against the Soviet
government was discussed at the meeting of the SR Central Committee in 1918 and rejected. And
now, years later, it was necessary to prove that the SR's had been engaged in self-deception.

The SR's had said at the time that they would not resort to terrorism until and unless the Bolsheviks
began to execute so- cialists. Or, in 1920, they had said that if the Bolsheviks were to threaten the
lives of SR hostages, then the party would take up arms.

[It was evidently all right to shoot the other hostages.]

So the question then was: Why did they qualify their renunci- ation of terrorism? Why wasn't it
absolute? And how had they even dared to think about taking up arms! "Why were there no
statements equivalent to absolute renunciation?" (But, Comrade Krylenko, maybe terrorism was
their "second nature"?)



The SR Party carried out no terrorist acts whatever, and this was clear even from Krylenko's
summing up of the charges. But the prosecution kept stretching such facts as these: One of the
defendants had in mind a plan for blowing up the locomotive of a train carrying the Council of
People's Commissars to Moscow. That meant the Central Committee of the SR's was guilty of ter-
rorism. And the terrorist Ivanova had spent one night near the railroad station with one charge of
explosives — which meant there had been an attempt to blow up Trotsky's train — and there- fore the
SR Central Committee was guilty of terrorism. And further: Donskoi, a member of the Central
Committee, warned Fanya Kaplan that she would be expelled from the Party if she fired at Lenin.
But that wasn't enough! Why hadn't she been categorically forbidden to? (Or perhaps: why hadn't
she been denounced to the Cheka?)

It was feathers of this sort that Krylenko kept plucking from the dead rooster — that the SR's had not
taken measures to stop individual terrorist acts by their unemployed and languishing gunmen. That
was the whole of their terrorism. (Yes, and those gunmen of theirs didn't do anything either. In 1922,
two of them, Konopleva and Semyonov, with suspicious eagerness, enriched the GPU and the
tribunal with their voluntary evidence, but their evidence couldn't be pinned on the SR Central
Committee — and suddenly and inexplicably these inveterate terrorists were re- leased scot-free.)

All the evidence was such that it had to be bolstered up with props. Krylenko explained things this
way in regard to one of the witnesses: "If this person had really wanted to make things up, it is
unlikely he would have done so in such a way as to hit the target merely by accident." (Strongly put,
indeed! This could be said about any piece of fabricated testimony whatever.) Or else, about
Donskoi: Could one really "suspect him of possess- ing the special insight to testify to what the
prosecution wanted"? It was just the other way around with Konopleva: the reliability of her
testimony was evidenced by the fact that she had not testified to everything the prosecution needed.
(But enough for the defendants to be shot.) "If we ask whether Konopleva con- cocted all this, then it
is ... clear: if one is going to concoct, one must really concoct [He should know!], and if one is going
to expose someone, one should really expose him." But she, you see, did not carry it through to the
end. Then things are put still another way: "After all, it is unlikely that Yefimov needed to put
Konopleva in danger of execution without cause." Once more correct, once more strongly put! Or,
even more strongly: "Could this encounter have taken place? Such a possibility is not ex- eluded."
Not excluded? That means it did take place. Off to the races!

Then, too, the "subversive group." They talked about this for a long time, and then suddenly:
"Dissolved for lack of activity." So what was all the fuss about? There had been several expropria-
tions of money from Soviet institutions (the SR's had nothing with which to work, to rent
apartments, to move from city to city). But previously these had been the lovely, noble "exes" — as
all the revolutionists called them. And now, in a Soviet court? They were "robbery and concealment
of stolen goods."

Through the material adduced by the prosecution in this trial, the dull, unblinking, yellow
streetlamps of the Law throw light on the whole uncertain, wavering, deluded history of this patheti-
cally garrulous, essentially lost, helpless, and even inactive party which never was worthily led. And
its every decision or lack of decision, its every casting about, upsurge, or retreat, was trans- formed
into and regarded as total guilt. . . guilt and more guilt.

And if in September, 1921, ten months before the trial, the SR Central Committee, already sitting in
the Butyrki, had written to the newly elected Central Committee that it did not agree to the
overthrow of the Bolshevik dictatorship by any available means, but only through rallying the
working masses and the dissemina- tion of propaganda — all of which meant that, even as they
languished in prison, they did not agree to being liberated through either terrorism or conspiracy —
then that, too, was converted into their primary guilt: Aha! so that means that you did agree to its
overthrow.



And what if they were, nevertheless, not guilty of overthrowing the government, and not guilty of
terrorism, and if there had been hardly any "expropriations" at all, and if they had long since been
forgiven for all the rest? Our favorite prosecutor pulled out his canonical weapon of last resort:
"Ultimately, failure to denounce is a category of crime applying to all the defendants without
exception, and it must be considered as having been proved."

The Socialist Revolutionary Party was guilty of not having squealed on itself! Now there's
something that couldn't miss! This represented a discovery that juridical thought had made in the
new Code. It was a paved highway along which they would keep driving and driving grateful
descendants into Siberia!

And Krylenko burst out in a temper: "Hardened eternal ene- mies" — that's who the defendants are!
In that case it's quite clear even without any trial what has to be done with them.

The Code was still so new that Krylenko could not even re- member the main counterrevolutionary
articles by their numbers — but how he slashed about with those numbers! How pro- foundly he cited
and interpreted them! Just as if the blade of the guillotine had for decades hinged and dropped only
on those articles. And especially new and important was the fact that we did not draw the distinction
between methods and means the old Tsarist Code had drawn. Such distinctions had no influence
either on the classification of the charges or on the penalties imposed! For us, intent and action were
identical! A resolution had been passed — we would try them for that. And whether it "was carried
out or not had no essential significance." Whether a man whispered to his wife in bed that it would
be a good thing to overthrow the Soviet government or whether he engaged in propaganda during
elections or threw a bomb, it was all one and the same! And the punishment was identical!!!

And just as a foresighted painter proceeds from his first few brusquely drawn, angular strokes to
create the whole desired portrait, so, for us, the entire panorama of 1937, 1945, and 1949 becomes
ever clearer and more visible in the sketches of 1922.

But no, one thing is missing! What's missing is the conduct of the defendants. They have not yet
become trained sheep. They are still people! We have been told little, very little, but from that little
we can understand a great deal. Sometimes through care- lessness, Krylenko cites what they said
right at the trial. For example, the defendant Berg "accused the Bolsheviks of responsi- bility for the
deaths of January 5" — shooting down those who were demonstrating on behalf of the Constituent
Assembly. And what Liberov said was even more direct: "I admit I was guilty of failing to work hard
enough at overthrowing the Bolshevik government in 1918. Yevgeniya Ratner adhered to the same
line, and Berg also declared: "I consider myself guilty before the workers' Russia for having been
unable to fight with all my strength against the so-called workers' and peasants' government, but I
hope that my time has not yet gone. "32 (It has gone, darling, all gone!)

Of course, there is in all this an element of the ancient passion for the resounding phrase, but there is
firmness too.

The prosecutor argued: the accused are dangerous to Soviet Russia because they consider everything
they did to have been a good thing. "Perhaps certain of the defendants find their own consolation in
the hope that some future chronicler will praise them or their conduct at the trial."

And a decree of the AU-Russian Central Executive Committee issued after the trial declared: "At the
trial itself they reserved to themselves the right to continue" their former activity.

The defendant Gendelman-Grabovsky (a lawyer himself) was conspicuous during the trial for his
arguments with Krylenko on tampering with the testimony of witnesses and on "special methods of
treating witnesses before the trial" — in other words, the obvious working-over they had gotten from
the GPU. (It is all there! All the elements are there! There was only a little way to go before attaining



the ideal.) Apparently the preliminary in- terrogation had been conducted under the supervision of
the prosecutor — that same Krylenko. And during that process in- dividual instances of a lack of
consistency in testimony had been ironed out. Yet some testimony was presented /or the first time
only at the trial itself.

Well, so what! So there were some rough spots. So it wasn't perfect. But in the last analysis, "We
have to declare altogether clearly and coldly that... we are not concerned with the question of how
the court of history is going to view our present deed."

And as far as the rough spots are concerned, we will take them under advisement and correct them.

But as it was, Krylenko, squirming, had to bring up — prob- ably for the first and last time in Soviet
jurisprudence — the matter of the inquiry, the initial inquiry required before investigation. And here's
how cleverly he handled this point: The proceeding which took place in the absence of the
prosecutor and which you considered the investigation was actually the inquiry. And the proceeding
in the presence of the prosecutor which you regarded as the reinvestigation, when all the loose ends
were gathered up and all the bolts tightened, was really the investigation. The dis- organized
"materials provided by the Organs for inquiry and unverified by the investigation have much less
value as proof than the materials provided by the skillfully directed investiga- tion."

Clever, wasn't it? Just try grinding that up in your mortar!

To be practical about it, Krylenko no doubt resented having to spend half a year getting ready for
this trial, then another two months barking at the defendants, and then having to drag out his
summation for fifteen hours, when all these defendants "had more than once been in the hands of the
extraordinary Organs at times when these Organs had extraordinary powers; but, thanks to some
circumstances or other, they had succeeded in surviving." So now Krylenko had to slave away to try
and get them executed legally.

There was, of course, "only one possible verdict — execution for every last one of them" ! But
Krylenko qualifies this gen- erously. Because this case is being watched by the whole world, the
prosecutor's demand "does not constitute a directive to the court" which the latter would "be obliged
to accept immediately for consideration or decision."

What a fine court, too, that requires such an explanation!

And, indeed, the tribunal did demonstrate its daring in the sentences it imposed: it did not hand down
the death penalty for "every last one of them," but for fourteen only. Most of the rest got prison and
camp sentences, while sentences in the form of productive labor were imposed on another hundred.

And just remember, reader, remember: "All the other courts of the Republic watch what the Supreme
Tribunal does. It pro- vides them with guidelines."

The sentences of the Verkhtrib are used "as directives for their guidance." As to how many more
would now be railroaded in the provinces, you can figure that out for yourself.

And, probably, on appeal the decision of the Presidium of the All-Russian Central Executive
Committee was worth the whole trial: the death sentences were to remain in effect, but not to be
carried out for the time being. The further fate of those con- demned would depend, then, on the
conduct of those SR's who had not yet been arrested, apparently including those abroad as well. In
other words: If you move against us, we'll squash them.

In the fields of Russia they were reaping the second peacetime harvest. There was no shooting
except in the courtyards of the Cheka. (Perkhurov in Yaroslavl, Metropolitan Veniamin in Petrograd.



And always, always, always.) Beneath the azure sky our first diplomats and journalists sailed abroad
across the blue waters. And the Central Executive Committee of Workers' and Peasants' Deputies
thrust into its pockets eternal hostages.

The members of the ruling Party read all sixty issues of Pravda devoted to the trial — for they all read
the papers — and all of them said: "Yes, yes, yes. " No one mumbled: "No! "

What, then, were they surprised at in 1937? What was there to complain about? Hadn't all the

foundations of lawlessness been laid — first by the extrajudicial reprisals of the Cheka, and then by
these early trials and this young Code? Wasn't 1937 also expedient (expedient for Stalin's purposes
and, perhaps. History's, too, for that matter)?

Prophetically, Krylenko let it slip that they were judging not the past but the future.
Only the first swath cut by the scythe is difficult.

On or about August 20, 1924, Boris Viktorovich Savinkov crossed the Soviet border. He was
immediately arrested and taken to the Lubyanka.

[Many hypotheses were advanced about his return. Only a little while ago, a certain Ardamatsky, a
person obviously connected with the archives and personnel of the Committee for State Security,
published a story which, despite being adorned with pretentiously inflated literary gewgaws, is
evidently close to the truth. (The magazine Neva, No. 11, 1967.) Having induced certain of
Savinkov's agents to betray him and having deceived others, the GPU used them to set a foolproof
trap, convincing Savinkov that inside Russia a large underground organization was languishing for
lack of a worthy leader! It would have been impossible to devise a more effective trap! And it would
have been impossible for Savinkov, after such a confused and sensational life, merely to spin it out
quietly to the end in Nice. He couldn't bear not trying to pull off one more feat and not returning to
Russia and his death.]

In all, the interrogation lasted for just one session, which consisted solely of voluntary testimony and
an evaluation of his activity. The official indictment was ready by August 23. The speed was totally
unbelievable, but it had im- pact. (Someone had estimated the situation quite accurately: to have
forced false and pitiful testimony out of Savinkov by torture would only have wrecked the
authenticity of the picture.)

In the official indictment, couched in already-well-developed terminology that turned everything
upside down, Savinkov was charged with just about everything imaginable: with being a "consistent
enemy of the poorest peasantry"; with "assisting the Russian bourgeoisie in carrying out its
imperialist ambitions" (in other words, he was in favor of continuing the war with Germany); with
"maintaining relations with representatives of the Allied command" (this would have been when he
was in charge of the Ministry of War!); with "becoming a member of soldiers' committees for
purposes of provocation" (i.e., he was elected by the soldiers' committees); and, last but not least,
some- thing to make even the chickens cackle with laughter — with having had "monarchist
sympathies."

But all that was old hat. There were some new items too — the standard charges for all future trials:
money from the im- perialists; espionage for Poland (they left out Japan, believe it or not); yes, and
he had also wanted to poison the Red Army with potassium cyanide (but for some reason he did not
poison even one Red Army soldier).

On August 26 the trial began. The presiding judge was Ulrikh — this being our earliest encounter
with him. And there was no prosecutor at all, nor any defense lawyer.



Savinkov was lackadaisical in defending himself, and he raised hardly any objection at all to the
evidence. He conceived of this trial in a lyrical sense. It was his last encounter with Russia and his
last opportunity to explain himself in public. And to repent. (Not of these imputed sins, but of
others.)

(And that theme song fitted well here, and greatly confused the defendant: "After all, we are all
Russians together. You and we adds up to us. You love Russia beyond a doubt, and we respect your
love — and do we not love Russia too? In fact, are we not at present the fortress and the glory of
Russia? And you wanted to fight against us? Repent!")

But it was the sentence that was most wonderful: "Imposition of the death penalty is not required in
the interests of preserving revolutionary law and order, and, on the grounds that motives of
vengeance should not influence the sense of justice of the prole- tarian masses" — the death penalty
was commuted to ten years' imprisonment.

Now that was a sensation! And it confused many minds too. Did it mean a relaxation? A
transformation? Ulrikh even pub- Ushed in Pravda an apologetic explanation of why Savinkov had
not been executed.

You see how strong the Soviet government has become in only seven years! Why should it be afraid
of some Savinkov or other! (On the twentieth anniversary of the Revolution, it is going to get
weaker, and don't be too hard on us because we are going to execute thousands.)

And so, on the heels of the first riddle of his return, there would have been the second riddle of his
being spared capital punishment had it not been overshadowed in May, 1925, by a third riddle: in a
state of depression, Savinkov jumped from an unbarred window into the interior courtyard of the
Lubyanka, and the gaypayooshniki, his guardian angels, simply couldn't manage to stop him and
hold on to his big, heavy body. However, just in case — so that there wouldn't be any scandal in the
service — Savinkov left them a suicide letter in which he explained logically and coherently why he
was killing himself — and this letter was so authentically phrased, so clearly written in Savin- kov's
style and vocabulary, that even Lev Borisovich, the son of the deceased, was fully convinced of its
genuineness and explained to everyone in Paris that no one except his father could have written it
and that he had ended his life because he realized his political bankruptcy.

[And we, silly prisoners of a later Lubyanka, confidently parroted to one another that the steel nets
hanging in the Lubyanka stairwells had been installed after Savinkov had committed suicide there.
Thus do we succumb to fancy legends to the extent of forgetting that the experience of jailers is,
after all, international in character. Such nets existed in American prisons as long ago as the
beginning of the century — and how could Soviet technology have been allowed to lag behind?

In 1937, when he was dying in a camp in the Kolyma, the former Chekist Artur Pryubel told one of
his fellow prisoners that he had been one of the four who threw Savinkov from a fifth-floor window
into the Lubyanka court- yard! (And there is no conflict between that statement and Ardamatsky's
recent account: There was a low sill; it was more like a door to the balcony than a window — they
had picked the right room! Only, according to Ardamatsky, the guards were careless; according to
Pryubel, they rushed him all together.)

Thus the second riddle, the unusually lenient sentence, was unraveled by the crude third "riddle."

The story ascribed to Pryubel could not be checked, but I had heard it, and in 1967 I told it to M. P.
Yakubovich. He, with his still youthful enthusiasm and shining eyes, exclaimed: "I believe it. Things
fit! And I didn't believe Blyumkin; I thought he was just bragging." What he had learned was this: At
the end of the twenties, Blyumkin had told Yakubovich, after swearing him to secrecy, that he was
the one who had written Savinkov's so-called suicide note, on orders from the GPU. Apparently



Blyumkin was allowed to see Savinkov in his cell constantly while he was in prison. He kept him
amused in the evenings. (Did Savinkov sense that death was creeping up on him . . . sly, friendly
death, which gives you no chance to guess the form your end will take?) And this had helped
Blyumkin acquire Savinkov's manner of speech and thought, had enabled him to enter into the
framework of his last ideas.

And they ask: Why throw him out the window? Wouldn't it have been easier simply to poison him?
Perhaps they showed someone the remains or thought they might need to.

And where, if not here, is the right place to report the fate of Blyumkin, who for all his Chekist
omnipotence was fearlessly brought up short by Man- delstam. Ehrenburg began to tell Blyumkin's
story, and suddenly became ashamed and dropped the subject. And there is a story to tell, too. After
the 1918 rout of the Left SR's, Blyumkin, the assassin of the German Ambassador Mirbach, not only
went unpunished, was not only spared the fate of all the other Left SR's, but was protected by
Dzerzhinsky, just as Dzerzhinsky had wanted to protect Kosyrev. Superficially he converted to
Bolshevism, and was kept on, one gathers, for particularly important assassinations. At one point,
close to the thirties, he was secretly sent to Paris to kill Bazhenov, a member of the staff of Stalin's
secretariat who had defected, and one night he succeeded in throwing him off a train. However, his
gambler's blood, or perhaps his admiration of Trotsky, led Blyumkin to the Princes' Islands in
Turkey, where Trotsky was living. He asked Trotsky whether there were any assignments he could
carry out for him in the Soviet Union, and Trotsky gave him a package for Radek. Blyumkin
delivered it, and his visit to Trotsky would have remained a secret had not the brilliant Radek already
been a stool pigeon. Radek brought down Blyumkin, who was thereupon devoured by the maw of
the monster his own hands had suckled with its first bloody milk.]

And all the major and most famous trials are still ahead of us.

Chapter 10

The Law Matures

But where were those mobs insanely storming the barbed- wire barricades on our western borders
whom we were going to shoot, under Article 71 of the Criminal Code, for unauthorized return to the
Russian Soviet Federated Socialist Republic? Contrary to scientific prediction, there were no such
crowds, and that article of the Code dictated by Lenin to Kursky remained use- less. The only
Russian crazy enough to do it was Savinkov, and they had ducked applying that article even to him.
On the other hand, the opposite penalty — exile abroad instead of execution — was tried out
immediately on a large scale.

In those days when he was composing the Criminal Code, Vladimir Ilyich Lenin, developing his
brilliant idea, wrote in the heat of the moment, on May 19:

Comrade Dzerzhinsky! On the question of exiling abroad writers and professors who aid the
counterrevolution: this is a measure which must be prepared most carefully. Unless we

prepare well, we can commit stupidities We must arrange the business in such a way as to

catch these "military spies" and keep on catching them con- stantly and systematically and
exiling them abroad. I beg you to show this secretly, and without making any copies of it, to
members of the Politburo.

[Lenin, fifth edition. Vol. 54, pp. 265-266.]

The extreme secrecy was natural in view of the importance and instructive impact of the measure.
The crystal-clear line-up of forces on the class front in Soviet Russia was, to put it simply, spoiled by
the presence of this shapeless, jellylike stain of the old bourgeois intelligentsia, which in the



ideological area genuinely played the role of military spies — and the very best solution one could
imagine was to scrape off that stagnant scum of ideas and toss it out abroad.

Comrade Lenin had already been stricken by his illness, but the members of the Politburo had
apparently given their approval, and Comrade Dzerzhinsky had done the catching. At the end of
1922, about three hundred prominent Russian humanists were loaded onto — a barge, perhaps? No,
they were put on a steamer and sent off to the European garbage dump. (Among those who settled
down in exile and acquired reputations were the philos- ophers N. O. Lossky, S. N. Bulgakov, N. A.
Berdyayev, F. A. Stepun, B. P. Vysheslavtsev, L. P. Karsavin, S. L. Frank, I. A. Ilin; the historians S.
P. Melgunov, V. A. Myakotin, A. A. Kizevetter, 1. 1. Lapshin, and others; the writers and publicists
Y. I. Aikhenvald, A. S. Izgoyev, M. A. Osorgin, A. V. Peshe- khonov. At the beginning of 1923,
additional small groups were sent off, including for example V. F. Bulgakov, the secretary of Lev
Tolstoi. And because of questionable associations some mathematicians also shared this fate,
including D. F. Selivanov.)

However, it didn't work out constantly and systematically. Per- haps the roar with which the emigres
announced that they re- garded it as a "gift" made it apparent that this punishment left something to
be desired, that it was a mistake to have let go good material for the executioner, and that poisonous
flowers might grow on that garbage dump. And so they abandoned this form of punishment. And all
subsequent purging led to either the executioner or the Archipelago.

The improved Criminal Code promulgated in 1926, which, in effect, continued right into
Khrushchev's times, tied all the formerly scattered political articles into one durable dragnet- Article
58 — and the roundup was under way. The catch swiftly expanded to include the engineering and
techfiical intelligentsia; it was especially dangerous because it occupied a firm position in the
economy and it was hard to keep an eye on it with the help of the Progressive Doctrine alone. It now
became clear that the trial in defense of Oldenborger had been a mistake — after all, a very nice little
center had been organized there. And Krylenko's declaration that "there was no question of sabotage
on the part of the engineers in 1920 and 1921" had granted an all too hasty absolution. Now it was
not sabotage but worse — wrecking, a word discovered, it appears, by a rank-and-file interrogator in
the Shakhty case.

It had no sooner been established that wrecking was what had to be tracked down — notwithstanding
the nonexistence of this concept in the entire history of mankind — than they began to discover it
without any trouble in all branches of industry and in all individual enterprises. However, there was
no unity of plan, no perfection of execution, in all these hit-or-miss discoveries, although Stalin, by
virtue of his character, and of course the entire investigative branch of our judicial apparatus,
evidently aspired to just that. But our Law had finally matured and could show the world something
really perfect — a big, coordinated, well-organized trial, this time a trial of engineers. And that is how
the Shakhty case came about.

K. The Shakhty Case— May 18- July 15, 1928

This case was tried before a Special Assize of the Supreme Court of the U.S.S.R., under Presiding
Judge A. Y. Vyshinsky (who was still the Rector of First Moscow University) ; the chief accuser was
N. V. Krylenko (what a significant encounter! — rather like a handing over of the juridical relay-
baton).

[And the members of the tribunal were the old revolutionaries Vasilyev- Yuzhin and Antonov-
Saratovsky. The very simple folk sound of their family names inclines one to a favorable reaction.
They are easy to remember. And when suddenly, in 1962, obituaries of certain victims of repression
appeared in Izvestiya, whose signature was at the bottom? That of the long-lived Antonov-
Saratovsky!]



There were fifty-three defendants and fifty-six witnesses. How spec- tacular!

Alas, in its spectacular aspect lay the weakness of this case. If one were to tie to each of the
defendants only three threads of evidence, there would still have to be 159 of them. And mean- while
Krylenko had only ten fingers and Vyshinsky another ten. Of course, the "defendants strove to
expose their heinous crimes to society" — but not all of them did, only sixteen; thirteen wiggled back
and forth, and twenty-four didn't admit their guilt at all. This introduced an impermissible discord,
and the masses could certainly not understand it. Along with its positive aspects — which had,
incidentally, already been displayed in earlier trials — such as the helplessness of the defendants and
of the defense attorneys, and their inability either to budge or to deflect the implacable boulder of the
sentence — the shortcomings of the new trial were fully apparent. Someone less experienced than
Krylenko might have been forgiven them — but not he.

On the threshold of the classless society, we were at last capable of realizing the conflictless trial — a
reflection of the absence of inner conflict in our social structure — in which not only the judge and
the prosecutor but also the defense lawyers and the defendants themselves would strive collectively
to achieve their common purpose.

Anyway, the whole scale of the Shakhty case, comprising as it did the coal industry alone and the
Donets Basin alone, was disproportionately paltry for this era.

It appears that then and there, on the day the Shakhty case ended, Krylenko began to dig a new,
capacious pit. (Even two of his own colleagues in the Shakhty case — the public accusers Osadchy
and Shein — fell into it.) And it goes without saying that the entire apparatus of the OGPU, which had
already landed in Yagoda's firm hands, aided him willingly and adroitly. It was necessary to create
and uncover an engineers' organization which encompassed the entire country. And for this purpose
it was essential to have several strong, prominent "wreckers" at its head. And what engineer was
unaware of just such an unequivocally strong and impatiently proud leader — Pyotr Akimovich Pal-
chinsky? An important mining engineer from as far back as the beginning of the century, he had
been the Deputy Chairman of the War Industry Committee during World War I — in other words, he
had directed the war efforts of all Russian industry, which had managed, during the course of the
war, to make up for the failures in Tsarist preparations. After February, 1917, he became the Deputy
Minister of Trade and Industry. He had been persecuted under the Tsar for revolutionary activity. He
had been imprisoned three times after October — in 1917, 1918, and 1922.

From 1920 on, he had been a professor at the Mining Institute and a consultant to the Gosplan — the
State Planning Commis- sion. (For more details about him see Part HI, Chapter 10.)

They picked this Palchinsky to be the chief defendant in a grandiose new trial. However, the
thoughtless Krylenko, stepping into what was for him a new field — engineering — not only knew
nothing about the resistance of materials but could not even conceive of the potential resistance of
souls . . . despite ten years of already sensational activity as a prosecutor. Krylenko's choice turned
out to be a mistake. Palchinsky resisted every pressure the OGPU knew — and did not surrender; in
fact, he died without signing any sort of nonsense at all. N. K. von Meek and A. F. Velichko were
subjected to torture with him, and they, too, appear not to have given in. We do not yet know
whether they died while under torture or whether they were shot. But they proved it was possible to
resist and that it was possible not to give in — and thus they left behind a spotlight of reproach to
shine on all the famous subsequent defendants.

To cover up his defeat, on May 24, 1929, Yagoda published a brief GPU communique on the
execution of the three for large- scale wrecking, which also announced the condemnation of many
other unidentified persons.

But how much time had been spent for nothing! Nearly a whole year! And how many nights of



interrogation! And how much inventiveness on the part of the interrogators! And all to no avail. And
Krylenko had to start over from the very beginning and find a leader who was both brilliant and
strong, and at the same time utterly weak and totally pliable. But so little did he understand this
cursed breed of engineers that another whole year was spent in unsuccessful tries. From the summer
of 1929 on, he worked over Khrennikov, but Khrennikov, too, died without agreeing to play a
dastardly role. They twisted old Fedotov, but he was too old, and furthermore he was a textile
engineer, which was an unprofitable field. And one more year was wasted! The country was waiting
for the all-inclusive wreckers' trial, and Comrade Stalin was waiting — but things just couldn't seem
to fall into place for Krylenko.

[And it is quite possible that this failure of his was held against him by the Leader and led to the
symbolic destruction of the prosecutor — on the very same guillotine as his victims.]

It was only in the summer of 1930 that someone found or suggested Ramzin, the Director of the
Thermal Engineering Institute! He was arrested, and in three months a magnificent drama was
prepared and performed, the genuine perfection of our justice and an un- attainable model for world
justice.

L. The Promparty (Industrial Party) Trial — November 25-Deceinber 7, 1930

This case was tried at a Special Assize of the Supreme Court, with the same Vyshinsky, the same
Antonov-Saratovsky, and that same favorite of ours, Krylenko.

This time none of those "technical reasons" arose to prevent the reader's being offered a full
stenographic report of the trial or to prohibit the attendance of foreign correspondents.

There was a majesty of concept: all the nation's industry, all its branches and planning organs, sat on
the defendants' benches. (However, only the eyes of the man who arranged it all could see the
crevices into which the mining industry and railroad transportation had disappeared.) At the same
time there was a thrift in the use of material: there were only eight defendants in all. (The mistakes of
the Shakhty trial had been taken into account. )

You are going to exclaim: Can eight men represent the en- tire industry of the country? Yes, indeed;
we have more even than we need. Three out of eight are solely in textiles, represent- ing the
industrial branch most important for national defense. But there were, no doubt, crowds of
witnesses? Just seven in all, who were exactly the same sort of wreckers as the defendants and were
also prisoners. But there were no doubt bales of documents that exposed them? Drawings? Projects?
Directives? Summaries of results? Proposals? Dispatches? Private correspondence? No, not one!
You mean to say. Not even one tiny piece of paper? How could the GPU let that sort of thing get by?
They had arrested all those people, and they hadn't even grabbed one little piece of paper? "There
had been a lot," but "it had all been destroyed." Because "there was no place to keep the files." At the
trial they produced only a few newspaper articles, published in the emigre press and our own. But in
that event how could the prosecution present its case? Well, to be sure, there was Nikolai
Vasilyevich Krylenko. And, to be sure, it wasn't the first time either. "The best evidence, no matter
what the circumstances, is the confessions of the defendants."

But what confessions! These confessions were not forced but inspired — repentance tearing whole
monologues from the breast, and talk, talk, and more talk, and self-exposure and self-flagella- tion!
They told old man Fedotov, who was sixty-six, that he could sit down, that he had talked long
enough, but no, he kept pouring out additional explanations and interpretations. For five sessions in a
row, no questions were asked. The defendants kept talking and talking and explaining and kept
asking for the floor again in order to supply whatever they had left out. They presented inferentially
everything the prosecution needed without any ques- tions whatever being asked. Ramzin, after
extensive explanations, went on to provide brief resumes, for the sake of clarity, as if he were



addressing slow-witted students. The defendants were afraid most of all that something might be left
unexplained, that some- one might go unexposed, that someone's name might go un- mentioned, that
someone's intention to wreck might not have been made clear. And how they reviled themselves! "I
am a class enemy!" "I was bribed." "Our bourgeois ideology." And then the prosecutor: "Was that
your error?" And Chamovsky replied: "And crime!" There was simply nothing for Krylenko to do.
For five sessions he went on drinking tea and eating cookies or whatever else they brought him.

But how did the defendants sustain such an emotional ex- plosion? There was no tape recorder to
take down their words, but Otsep, the defense attorney, described them: "The defend- ants' words
flowed in a businesslike manner, cold and profession- ally calm." There you are! Such a passion for
confession — and businesslike at the same time? Cold? More than that: they appear to have mumbled
their glib repentance so listlessly that Vyshinsky often asked them to speak louder, more clearly,
because they couldn't be heard.

The harmony of the trial was not at all disturbed by the de- fense, which agreed with all the
prosecutor's proposals. The principal defense lawyer called the prosecutor's summation his- toric and
described his own as narrow, admitting that in making it he had gone against the dictates of his heart,
for "a Soviet de- fense lawyer is first of all a Soviet citizen" and "like all workers, he, too, is
outraged" at the crimes of the defendants. During the trial the defense asked shy and tentative
questions and then instantly backed away from them if Vyshinsky interrupted. The lawyers actually
defended only two harmless textile officials and did not challenge the formal charges nor the
description of the defendants' actions, but asked only whether the defendants might avoid execution.
Is it more useful. Comrade Judges, "to have their corpses or their labor?"

. . . How foul-smelling were the crimes of these bourgeois engi- neers? Here is what they consisted
of. They planned to reduce the tempo of development, as, for instance, to an over-all annual increase
in production of only 20 to 22 percent, whereas the workers were prepared to increase it by 40 to 50
percent. They slowed down the rate of mining local fuels. They were too slow in developing the
Kuznetsk Basin. They exploited theoretical and economic arguments — such as whether to supply
the Donets Basin with electricity from the Dnieper power station or whether to build a supertrunk-
Une between Moscow and the Donbas — in order to delay the solutions of important problems. (The
work stops while engineers argue!) They postponed considering new engineering projects (i.e., they
did not authorize them immediately). In lectures on the resistance of mate- rials, they took an anti-
Soviet line. They installed worn-out equipment. They tied up capital funds, for example, by using
them for costly and lengthy construction projects. They carried out unnecessary (!) repairs. They
misused metals (some grades of iron were wanting). They created an imbalance between the
departments of a plant and between the supply of raw materials and the capacity for processing them
industrially. (This was particularly notable in the textile industry, where they built one or two
factories more than they needed to process the cotton harvest.) Then they leaped from minimal to
maximal plans. And obvious wrecking began through the accelerated develop- ment of that same
unfortunate textile industry. Most importantly, they planned sabotage in the field of electric power —
even though none was ever carried out. Thus wrecking did not take the form of actual damage done
but remained within the area of operational planning, yet it was intended to lead to a nationwide
crisis and even to economic paralysis in 1930! But it didn't — and only because of the competitive
industrial and financial plans of the masses (doubling the figures!). . . .

"Yeah, yeah, yeah," begins the skeptical reader.

What? That isn't enough for you? But if, at the trial, we repeat every point and chew it over five or
eight times, then perhaps it turns out not to be so negligible?

"Yeah, yeah, yeah." The reader of the sixties nonetheless sticks to his own view. "Mightn't all that
have happened precisely because of those competing industrial and financial plans? Aren't things
bound to be out of balance if any union meeting, without consulting Gosplan, can twist the ratios



around as it pleases?"



Oh, the prosecutor's bread is bitter! After all, they decided to publish every last word! That meant
that engineers would read it too. "You've made your bed, now lie in it." And Krylenko rushed in
fearlessly to discuss and to question and cross-question engineering details! And the inside pages and
inserts of the enormous newspapers were full of small print about fine tech- nical points. The notion
was that every reader would be over- come by the sheer mass of material, that he wouldn't have
enough time, even if he used up all his evenings and his rest days too, and so he wouldn't read it all
but would only notice the refrain following every few paragraphs: "We were wreckers, wreckers,
wreckers."

But suppose someone did begin, and read every last line?

In that case, he would come to see, through the banality of self- accusations, composed with such
ineptitude and stupidity, that the Lubyanka boa constrictor had gotten involved in something outside
its competence, its own kind of work, that what breaks free of the crude noose is the strong- winged
thought of the twentieth century. There the prisoners are: in the dock, submis- sive, repressed — but
their thought leaps out. Even their terrified, tired tongues manage to name everything with its proper
name and to tell us everything.

. . Here is the situation in which they worked. Kalinnikov: "Well, to be sure, a situation of technical
distrust was created." Larichev: "Whether we wanted to or not, we still had to produce that 42
millions of tons of petroleum [i.e., it had been thus ordered from on high] . . . because, no matter
what, 42 million tons of petroleum could not have been produced under any circumstances
whatever."

All the work of that unhappy generation of our engineers was squeezed between two such
impossibilities. The Thermal Engineering Institute was proud of its principal research achievement,
which was the sharply improved coefficient of fuel consumption. On this basis, lower requirements
for fuel production had been stipulated in the preliminary plan. And that meant wrecking — reducing
fuel resources. In the transportation plan, they had provided for all freight cars to be equipped with
automatic coupling. And that meant wrecking: they had tied up capital funds. After all, it takes a long
time to intro- duce automatic coupling, and the capital investment involved in installing it can only
be recouped over a long period, and we want everything immediately! In order to make more
efficient use of single- track railroads, they decided to increase the size of the locomotives and
freight cars. And was that considered modernization? No, it was wreck- ing. Because in that case it
would have been necessary to invest funds in strengthening the roadbeds and the superstructures of
the bridges.

From the profound economic consideration that in America capital is cheap and labor dear, and that

the situation here is just the opposite, and that we therefore ought not to borrow things with
monkeylike imitativeness, Fedotov concluded that it was useless for us to purchase expensive
American assembly-Hue machinery. For the next ten years it would be more profitable for us to buy
less sophisticated English machinery and to put more workers on it, since it was inevitable that in ten
years' time whatever we had purchased would be replaced anyway, no matter what. And we could
then buy more expensive machinery. So that, too, was wrecking. Alleging economy as his reason,
what he really wanted, they charged, was to avoid having the most advanced type of machinery in
Soviet industry. They began to build new factories out of reinforced concrete, instead of cheaper
ordinary concrete, on the grounds that over a hundred-year period reinforced concrete would recoup
the additional investment many times over. So that, too, was wrecking: tying up capital; using up
scarce reinforcing rods when iron was in short supply. (What was it supposed to be kept for — false
teeth?)

From among the defendants, Fedotov willingly conceded: Of course, if every kopeck must be



counted today, then it could be considered wrecking. The English say: I'm not rich enough to buy
cheap goods.

He tries softly to explain to the hardheaded prosecutor: "Theoreti- cal approaches of every kind
project norms which in the final analysis are [they will be considered to be] wrecking. ..."

Well, tell me now: how much more clearly could a frightened de- fendant speak out? What is theory
to us is wrecking to you! Because you are compelled to grab today, without any thought for
tomorrow.

Old Fedotov tries to explain where thousands and millions of rubles are lost in the insane rush of the
Five- Year Plan: Cotton is not sorted where it is grown so that every factory can be sent that grade
and kind of cotton it requires; instead, it is shipped any old way, all mixed up. But the prosecutor
doesn't listen to him. With the stubbornness of a block of stone he keeps coming back again and
again — ten times — to the more obvious question he has put together out of children's building
blocks: Why did they begin to build the so-called "factory- palaces," with high ceilings, broad
corridors, and unnecessarily good ventilation? Was that not the most obvious sort of wrecking? After
all, that amounted to tying up capital irrevocably! The bourgeois wreckers explain to him that the
People's Commissariat of Labor wanted to build factories for the workers in the land of the
proletariat which were spacious and had good air. [That means there are also wreckers in the
People's Commissariat of Labor. Make a note of that!] The doctors had insisted on thirty feet of
space between floors, and Fedotov reduced it to twenty — so why not to sixteen? Now that was
wrecking! (If he had reduced it to fifteen, that would have been flagrant wrecking: he would have
wanted to create the nightmare conditions of a capitalist factory for free Soviet workers.) They ex-
plain to Krylenko that in relation to the entire cost of the factory and its equipment, this difference
accounted for 3 percent of the total — but no, again and again and again, he keeps on about the
height of the ceilings! And how did they dare install such powerful ventilators? They took into
account the hottest summer days. Why the hottest days? So what! Let the workers sweat a little on
the hottest days!

And in the meantime: "The disproportions were inherent. . . . Bungling organization saw to that
before there was any 'Engineers Center.'" (Chamovsky.) "No wrecking activities were ever neces-
sary. . . . All one had to do was carry out the appropriate actions and everything would happen on its
own." (Chamovsky again.) He could not have expressed himself more clearly. And he said this after
many months in the Lubyanka and from the defendants' bench in court. The appropriate actions —
i.e., those imposed by bungling higher-ups — were quite enough: carry them out and the unthinkable
plan would destroy itself. Here was their kind of wrecking: "We had the capability of producing,
say, 1,000 tons and we were ordered [in other words, by a nonsensical plan] to produce 3,000, so we
took no steps to produce them." . . .

You must admit that for an official, double-checked, spruced-up stenographic record in those years,
this is not so little.

On many occasions Krylenko drives his actors to tones of exhaustion, thanks to the nonsense they
are compelled to grind out over and over again . . . like a bad play in which the actor is ashamed for
the dramatist, and yet has to go on and on any- way, to keep body and soul together.

Krylenko: "Do you agree?"

Fedotov: "I agree . . . even though in general I do not think . . ,"
Krylenko: "Do you confirm this?"

Fedotov: "Properly speaking ... in certain portions . . . and so to speak, in general . . . yes."



For the engineers (those who were still free, not yet imprisoned, and who had to face the necessity of
working cheerfully after the defamation at the trial of their whole class), there was no way out. They
were damned if they did and damned if they didn't. If they went forward, it was wrong, and if they
went backward, it was wrong too. If they hurried, they were hurrying for the pur- pose of wrecking.
If they moved methodically, it meant wrecking by slowing down tempos. If they were painstaking in
develop- ing some branch of industry, it was intentional delay, sabotage. And if they indulged in
capricious leaps, their intention was to produce an imbalance for the purpose of wrecking. Using
capital for repairs, improvements, or capital readiness was tying up capital funds. And if they
allowed equipment to be used until it broke down, it was a diversionary action! (In addition, the
interrogators would get all this information out of them by sub- jecting them to sleeplessness and
punishment cells and then de- manding that they give convincing examples of how they might have
carried on wrecking activities.)

"Give us a clear example! Give us a clear example of your wrecking activity!" the impatient
Krylenko urges them on.

(They will give you outstanding examples! Just wait! Soon someone will write the history of the
technology of those years! He will give you examples — and negative examples. He will evaluate for
you all the convulsions of your epileptic "Five- Year Plan in Four Years." Then we will find out how
much of the people's wealth and strength was squandered. Then we will find out how all the best
projects were destroyed, and how the worst projects were carried out by the worst means. Well, yes,
if the Mao Tse-tung breed of Red Guard youths supervise brilliant engineers, what good can come of
it? Dilettante enthusiasts — they were the ones who egged on their even stupider leaders.)

Yes, full details are a disservice. Somehow the more details provided, the less the evil deeds seem to
smell of execution.

But just a moment! We've not had everything yet! The most important crimes all lie ahead! Here

they are, here they come, comprehensible and intelligible to every illiterate! The Promparty (1 )
prepared the way for the Intervention; (2) took money from the imperialists; (3) conducted
espionage; (4) assigned cabinet posts in a future government.

And that did it! All mouths were shut. And all those who had been expressing their reservations fell
silent. And only the tramp- ing of demonstrators could be heard, and the roars outside the window:
"Death! Death! Death!"

What about some more details? Why should you want more details? Well, then, if that's the way you
want it; but they will only be more frightening. They were all acting under orders from the French
General Staff. After all, France doesn't have enough worries, or difficulties, or party conflicts of its
own, and it is enough just to whistle, and, lo and behold, divisions will march.

... Intervention! First they planned it for 1928. But they couldn't come to an agreement, they couldn't
tie up all the loose ends. All right, so they postponed it to 1930. But once more they couldn't agree
among themselves. All right, 1931 then. And, as a matter of fact, here's how it was to go: France
herself would not fight but, as her commission for organizing the deal, would take the Ukraine right
bank as her share. England wouldn't fight either, of course, but, in order to raise a scare, promised to
send her fleet into the Black Sea and into the Baltic — in return, she would get Caucasian oil. The
actual warriors would, for the most part, be the following: 100,000 emigres (true, they had long since
scattered to the four winds, but it would take only a whistle to gather them all together again
immediately) ; Poland — for which she would get half the Ukraine; Rumania (whose brilliant
successes in World War I were famous — she was a formidable enemy). And then there were Latvia
and Estonia. (These two small countries would willingly drop all the concerns of their young
governments and rush forth en masse to do battle.) And the most frightening thing of all was the
direction of the main blow. How's that? Was it already known? Yes! It would begin from Bessarabia,



and from there, keeping to the right bank of the Dnieper, it would move straight on Moscow.

[Who drew that arrow for Krylenko on a cigarette pack — was it not drawn by the same hand that
thought up our entire defense strategy in 1941?]

And at that fateful moment, would not all our railroads certainly be blown up? No, not at all.
Bottlenecks would be created! And the Promparty would also yank out the fuses in electric power
sta- tions, and the entire Soviet Union would be plunged into dark- ness, and all our machinery
would come to a halt, including the textile machinery! And sabotage would be carried out. (Atten-
tion, defendants! You must not name your methods of sabotage, nor the factories which were your
objectives, nor the geographic sites involved, until the closed session. And you must not name
names, whether foreign or our own!) Combine all this with the fatal blow which will have been dealt
the textile industry by that time! Add the fact that the saboteurs will have constructed two or three
textile factories in Byelorussia which will serve as a base of operations for the interventionists.

[Protsess Prompartii, p. 356. This was not intended as a joke.]

With the textile fac- tories already in their hands, the interventionists would march implacably on
Moscow. But here was the cleverest part of the whole plot: though they didn't succeed in doing so,
they had wanted to drain the Kuban marshes and the Polesye swamps, and the swamp near Lake
Urnen (Vyshinsky had forbidden them to name the exact places, but one of the witnesses blurted
them out), and then the interventionists would open up the shortest routes and would get to Moscow
without wetting their feet or their horses' hoofs. (And why was it so hard for the Tatars? Why was it
that Napoleon didn't reach Moscow? Yes! It was because of the Polesye and the Ilmen swamps. And
once those swamps were drained, the capital would lie exposed.) On top of that, don't forget to add
that hangars had been built there under the guise of sawmills (places not to be named!) so that the
planes of the interventionists would not get wet in the rain and could be taxied into them. And
housing for the intervention- ists had also been built (do not name the places!). (And where had all
the homeless occupation armies been quartered in previous wars?) The defendants had received all
the directives on these matters from the mysterious foreign gentlemen K. and R. (It is strictly
forbidden to name their names — or to name the countries they come from!) And most recently they
had even begun "the preparation of treasonable actions by individual units of the Red Army." (Do
not name the branches of the service, nor the units, nor the names of any persons involved!) True,
they hadn't done any of this; but they had also intended (though they hadn't done that either) to
organize within some central army institution a cell of financiers and former officers of the White
armies. (Ah, the White Army? Write it down! Start making arrests! ) And cells of anti-Soviet
students. (Students? Write it down! Start making arrests!)

(Incidentally, don't push things too far. We wouldn't want the workers to get despondent and begin to
feel that everything is falling apart, that the Soviet government has been caught nap- ping. And so
they also threw a good deal of light on that side of it: that they had intended to do a lot and had
accomplished very little, that not one industry had suffered serious losses!)

But why didn't the Intervention take place anyway? For various complex reasons. Either because
Poincare hadn't been elected in France, or else because our emigre industrialists decided that their
former enterprises had not yet been sufficiently restored by the Bolsheviks — let the Bolsheviks do
more. And then, too, they couldn't seem to come to terms with Poland and Rumania.

So, all right, there hadn't been any intervention, but there was, at least, a Promparty! Do you hear the
tramp of marching feet? Do you hear the murmur of the working masses: "Death! Death! Death!"!
And the marchers were "those who in the event of war would have to atone with their deaths, and
deprivations and sufferings, for the work of these men."

(And it was as if he had looked into a crystal ball: it was in- deed with their deaths, and deprivations



and sufferings, that those trusting demonstrators would atone in 1941 for the work . . . of these men!
But where is your finger pointing, prosecutor? At whom is your finger pointing?)

So then — why was it the Industrial Party! Why a party and not an Engineering-Technical Center?
We are accustomed to having a Center!

Yes, there was a Center too. But they had decided to reorganize themselves into a party. It was more
respectable. That way it would be easier to fight over cabinet posts in the future govern- ment. It
would "mobilize the engineering-technical masses for the struggle for power." And whom would
they be struggling against? Other parties, of course. Against the Working Peasants Party — the
TKP — in the first place, for after all they had 200,000 members! Against the Menshevik Party in the
second place! And as for a Center, those three parties together were to have con- stituted a United
Center. But the GPU had destroyed them. "And it's a good thing they destroyed us." (All the
defendants were glad!)

(And it was flattering to Stalin to annihilate three more parties. Would there have been any glory,
indeed, in merely adding another three "Centers" to his Ust?)

And having a party instead of a Center meant having another Central Committee — yes, the
Promparty's own Central Com- mittee! True, there had not been any party conferences, nor had there
been any elections, not even one. Whoever wanted to be on the Central Committee just joined up —
five people all told. They all made way for one another, and they all yielded the post of chairman to
one another too. There were no meetings — either of the Central Committee (no one else would
remember this, but Ramzin would remember it very well indeed, and he would name names) or of
the groups from various branches of industry. There seemed even to be some dearth of members. As
Chamovsky said, "There never was any formal organization of a Promparty." And how many
members had there been? Larichev: "A count of members would have been difficult; the exact
composition was unknown." And how had they carried out their wrecking? How had directives been
communicated? Well, it was just a matter of whoever met whomever in some particular institution —
directives were passed on orally. From then on everyone would carry out his own wrecking on his
own conscience. (Well, now, Ramzin confidently named two thou- sand members. And whenever he
named two, they arrested five. According to the documents in the trial, there were altogether thirty to
forty thousand engineers throughout the U.S.S.R. That meant they would arrest every seventh one,
and terrify the other six.) And what about contacts with the Working Peasants Party? Well, they
might meet in the State Planning Commission, or else in the Supreme Council of the Economy, and
"plan systematic acts against village Communists."

Where have we seen all this before? Aha! InAida. They are seeing Radames off on his campaign,
and the orchestra is thun- dering, and eight warriors are standing there in helmets and with spears —
and two thousand more are painted on the backdrop.

That's your Promparty.

But that's all right. It works. The show goes on! (Today it is quite impossible to believe just how

threatening and serious it all looked at the time.) And it is hammered in by repetition, and every
individual episode is gone over several times. And be- cause of this the awful visions multiply. And,
in addition, so that things won't become too bland, the defendants suddenly "forget" something
terribly unimportant, or else they "try to renounce testimony" — and right then and there "they pin
them down with cross-questioning," and it all winds up being as lively as the Moscow Art Theatre.

But Krylenko pressed too hard. On the one hand he planned to disembowel the Promparty — to

disclose its social basis. That was a question of class, and his analysis couldn't go wrong. But
Krylenko abandoned the Stanislavsky method, didn't assign the roles, relied on improvisation. He let
everyone tell his own story of his own life, and what his relationship to the Revolution had been, and



how he was led to participate in wrecking.

And, in one fell swoop, that thoughtless insertion, that human picture, spoiled all five acts.

The first thing that we learn to our astonishment is that all eight of these big shots of the bourgeois
intelligentsia came from poor families: the son of a peasant; one of the many children of a clerk; the
son of an artisan; the son of a rural schoolteacher; the son of a peddler. At school, they were all
impoverished and earned the money for their education themselves, from the ages of twelve,
thirteen, and fourteen. Some gave lessons, and some worked on locomotives. And here was what
was monstrous: no one barred their way to an education! They all completed the courses in high
school and in higher technological institutions, and they became important and famous professors.
(How could that have been? They always told us that under Tsarism only the children of landowners
and capitalists . . . Those calendars cer- tainly couldn't have been lying! )

And here and now, in the Soviet period, engineers were in a very difficult position. It was almost
impossible for them to provide their children with a higher education (after all, the children of the
intelligentsia had the lowest priority, remember! ). The court didn't argue, nor did Krylenko. (And
the defendants themselves hastened to qualify what they had said, asserting that, against the
background of the general and over-all victories, this, of course, was unimportant.)

Here we begin to distinguish bit by bit among the defendants, who, up to this point, had talked very
much like one another. Their age differential also divided them with respect to probity. Those close
to sixty and older made statements that aroused a friendly, sympathetic reaction. But forty-three-
year-old Ramzin and Larichev, and thirty -nine-year-old Ochkin (the same one who had denounced
Glavtop — the Main Fuels Committee — in 1921), were glib and shameless. And all the major
testimony about the Promparty and intervention comes from them. Ramzin was the kind of person
(as a result of his early and extraordinary successes) who was shunned by the entire engineering
profession, and he endured it. At the trial he caught Krylenko's hints on the wing and volunteered
precise statements. All the charges were founded on Ramzin's recollections. He possessed such self-
control and force that he might very well have conducted plenipotentiary talks in Paris about
intervention (on assignment from the GPU, obviously). Ochkin, too, was a fast climber: at twenty-
nine he had already possessed "the unlimited trust of the Council of Labor and Defense and the
Council of People's Commissars."

One couldn't say the same about sixty-two-year-old Professor Chamovsky: Anonymous students had
persecuted him in the wall newspapers. After twenty-three years of lecturing, he had been summoned
to a general students' meeting to "give an account of his work." He hadn't gone.

And in 1921 Professor Kalinnikov had headed an open struggle against the Soviet government —
specifically a professors' strike. What it amounted to was this: Back in the days of the Stolypin
repression, the Moscow Higher Technical School had won academic autonomy (including the right
to fill important posts, elect a rector, etc.). In 1921 the professors in this school had re-elected
Kalinnikov to a new term as rector, but the People's Commissariat didn't want him there and had
designated its own candidate. However, the professors went on strike and were supported by the
students — at that time there were no truly proletarian students — and Kalinnikov was rector for a
whole year despite the wishes of the Soviet government. (It was only in 1922 that they had wrung
the neck of that autonomy, and even then, in all probability, not without arrests.)

Fedotov was sixty- six years old and he had been a factory engineer eleven years longer than the
whole life span of the Russian Social Democratic Workers' Party — from which the Soviet
Communist Party had sprung. He had worked at all the spinning mills and textile factories in Russia.
(How hateful such people are, and how desirable it is to get rid of them as quickly as possible!) In
1905 he had left his position as a director of the Morozov textile firm and the high salary which went
with it because he preferred to attend the "Red Funerals" which fol- lowed the caskets of the workers



killed by the Cossacks. And now he was ill, had poor eyesight, and was too weak to leave home at
night even to go to the theater.

And such people organized intervention? And economic ruin? Chamovsky had not had any free
evenings for many years be- cause he had been so busy with his teaching and with developing new
sciences — such as the science of the organization of produc- tion and the scientific principles of
rationalization. I recall from my own childhood the engineering professors of those years, and that's
exactly what they were like. Their evenings were given up to their students at all levels, and they
didn't get home to their families until 1 1 P.M. After all, at the beginning of the Five- Year Plan there
were only thirty thousand of them for the whole country. They were all strained to the breaking
point.

And it was these people who were supposed to have con- trived a crisis, to have spied in exchange
for handouts?

Ramzin uttered just one honest phrase during the whole trial: "The path of wrecking is alien to the
inner structure of engineer- ing."

Throughout the trial Krylenko forced the defendants to con- cede apologetically that they were
"scarcely conversant" with or were "illiterate" in politics. After all, politics is much more diffi- cult
and much loftier than some kind of metallurgy or turbine design. In politics your head won't help
you, nor will your educa- tion. Come on! Answer me! What was your attitude toward the October
Revolution when it happened? Skeptical. In other words, immediately hostile. Why? Why? Why?

Krylenko hounded them with his theoretical questions — and as a result of simple human slips of the
tongue inconsistent with their assigned roles, the nucleus of the truth is disclosed to us — as to what
really had taken place and from what the entire bubble had been blown.

What the engineers had first seen in the October coup d'etat was ruin. (And for three years there had
truly been ruin and nothing else.) Beyond that, they had seen the loss of even the most elementary
freedoms. (And these freedoms never returned.) How, then, could engineers not have wanted a
democratic repub- he? How could engineers accept the dictatorship of the workers, the dictatorship
of their subordinates in industry, so little skilled or trained and comprehending neither the physical
nor the eco- nomic laws of production, but now occupying the top positions, from which they
supervised the engineers? Why shouldn't the engineers have considered it more natural for the
structure of society to be headed by those who could intelligently direct its activity? (And, excepting
only the question of the moral leader- ship of society, is not this precisely where all social
cybernetics is leading today? Is it not true that professional politicians are boils on the neck of
society that prevent it from turning its head and moving its arms?) And why shouldn't engineers have
politi- cal views? After all, politics is not even a science, but is an em- pirical area not susceptible to
description by any mathematical apparatus; furthermore, it is an area subject to human egotism and
blind passion. (Even in the trial Charnovsky speaks out: "Politics must, nonetheless, be guided to
some degree by the findings of technology.")

The wild pressures of War Communism could only sicken the engineers. An engineer cannot
participate in irrationality, and until 1920 the majority of them did nothing, even though they were
barbarically impoverished. When NEP — the New Eco- nomic Policy — got under way, the engineers
willingly went back to work. They accepted NEP as an indication that the govern- ment had come to
its senses. But, alas, conditions were not what they had been. The engineers were looked on as a
socially sus- picious element that did not even have the right to provide an education for its own
children. Engineers were paid immeasur- ably low salaries in proportion to their contribution to
produc- tion. But while their superiors demanded successes in production from them, and discipline,
they were deprived of the authority to impose this discipline. Any worker could not only refuse to
carry out the instructions of an engineer, but could insult and even strike him and go unpunished —



and as a representative of the ruling class the worker was always right in such a case.

Krylenko objects: "Do you remember the Oldenborger trial?" (In other words, how we, so to speak,
defended him.)

Fedotov: "Yes. He had to lose his life in order to attract some attention to the predicament of the
engineer."

Krylenko (disappointed): "Well, that was not how the matter was put."

Fedotov: "He died and he was not the only one to die. He died voluntarily, and many others were
killed. " Krylenko was silent. That meant it was true. (Leaf through the Oldenborger trial again, and
just imagine the persecution. And with the additional final line: "Many others were killed.")

So it was that the engineer was to blame for everything, even when he had done nothing wrong. But
if he actually had made a real mistake, and after all he was a human being, he would be torn to
pieces unless his colleagues could manage to cover things up. For would they value honesty? So the
engineers then were forced at times to lie to the Party leadership?

To restore their authority and prestige, the engineers really had to unite among themselves and help
each other out. They were all in danger. But they didn't need any kind of conference, any
membership cards, to achieve such unity. Like every kind of mutual understanding between
intelligent and clear-thinking people, it was attained by a few quiet, even accidental words; no kind
of voting was called for. Only narrow minds need resolu- tions and the Party stick. (And this was
something Stalin could never understand, nor could the interrogators, nor their whole crowd. They
had never had any experience of human relation- ships of that kind. They had never seen anything
like that in Party history!) In any case, that sort of unity had long existed among Russian engineers in
their big illiterate nation of petty tyrants. It had already been tested for several decades. But now a
new government had discovered it and become alarmed.

Then came 1927. And the rationality of the NEP period went up in smoke. And it turned out that the
entire NEP was merely a cynical deceit. Extravagantly unrealistic projections of a super- industrial
forward leap had been announced; impossible plans and tasks had been assigned. In those conditions,
what was there for the collective engineering intelligence to do — the engineering leadership of the
State Planning Commission and the Supreme Council of the Economy? To submit to insanity? To
stay on the sidelines? It would have cost them nothing. One can write any figures one pleases on a
piece of paper. But "our comrades, our colleagues in actual production, will not be able to fulfill
these assignments." And that meant it was necessary to try to intro- duce some moderation into these
plans, to bring them under the control of reason, to eliminate entirely the most outrageous
assignments. To create, so to speak, their own State Planning Commission of engineers in order to
correct the stupidities of the leaders. And the most amusing thing was that this was in their
interests — the interests of the leaders — too. And in the interests of all industry and of all the people,
since ruinous decisions could be avoided, and squandered, scattered millions could be picked up
from the ground. To defend quality — "the heart of technology" — amid the general uproar about
quantity, planning, and overplanning. And to indoctrinate students with this spirit.

That's what it was, the thin, delicate fabric of the truth. That is what it really was.

But to utter such thoughts aloud in 1930 meant being shot.

And yet it was still too little and too invisible to arouse the wrath of the mob.

It was therefore necessary to reprocess the silent and redeem- ing collusion of the engineers into
crude wrecking and inter- vention.



Thus, in the picture they substituted, we nonetheless caught a fleshless — and fruitless — vision of the
truth. The work of the stage director began to fall apart. Fedotov had already blurted out something
about sleepless nights ( ! ) during the eight months of his imprisonment; and about some important
official of the GPU who had recently shaken his hand (?) (so there must have been a deal: you play
your roles, and the GPU will carry out its promises?). And even the witnesses, though their role was
in- comparably less important, began to get confused.

Krylenko: "Did you participate in this group?"

Witness Kirpotenko: "Two or three times, when questions of intervention were being considered."

And that was just what was needed!

Krylenko (encouragingly): "Go on."

Kirpotenko (a pause): "Other than that nothing is known."

Krylenko urges him on, tries to give him his cue again.

Kirpotenko (stupidly): "Other than intervention nothing is known to me. "

Then, when there was an actual confrontation with Kupri- yanov, the facts no longed jibed. Krylenko
got angry, and he shouted at the inept prisoners:

"Then you just have to fix things so you come up with the same answers. "

And in the recess, behind the scenes, everything was once more brought up to snuff. All the
defendants were once again nervously awaiting their cues. And Krylenko prompted all eight of them
at once: the emigre industrialists had published an article abroad to the effect that they had held no
talks at all with Ramzin and Larichev and knew nothing whatever about any Promparty, and that the
testimony of the witnesses had in all likelihood been forced from them by torture. Well, what are you
going to say to that?

Good Lord! How outraged the defendants were! They clamored for the floor without waiting their
turns. What had become of that weary calm with which they had humiliated themselves and their
colleagues for seven days? Boiling indigna- tion at those emigres burst from them. They demanded
permis- sion to send a written declaration to the newspapers in defense of GPU methods. (Now,
wasn't that an embellishment? Wasn't that a jewel?) And Ramzin declared: "Our presence here is
sufficient proof that we were not subjected to tortures and tor- ments!" (And what, pray tell, would
be the use of tortures that made it impossible for the defendants to appear in court!) And Fedotov:
"Imprisonment did me good and not only me. ... I even feel better in prison than in freedom." And
Ochkin: "Me too. I feel better too!"

It was out of sheer generosity that Krylenko and Vyshinsky declined their offer of a collective
declaration. They certainly would have written one! And they certainly would have signed it!

But maybe someone had some lingering suspicions still? Well, in that case. Comrade Krylenko
vouchsafed them a flash of his brilliant logic. "If we should admit even for one second that these
people were telling untruths, then why were they arrested and why did they all at once start babbling
their heads off?"

Now that is the power of logic for you! For a thousand years prosecutors and accusers had never
even imagined that the fact of arrest might in itself be a proof of guilt. If the defendants were
innocent, then why had they been arrested? And once they had been arrested, that meant they were



guilty!



And, indeed, why had they started babbling away?

"The question of torture we discard! . . . But let us put the question psychologically: Why did they
confess? And I ask you: What else could they have done?"

Well, how true! How psychological! If you ever served time in that institution, just recollect: what
else was there to do?

(Ivanov-Razumnik wrote that in 1938 he was imprisoned in the same cell in the Butyrki as Krylenko,
and that Krylenko's place in the cell was under the board bunks. I can picture that vividly — since I
have crawled there myself. The bunks were so low that the only way one could crawl along the dirty
asphalt floor was flat on one's stomach, but newcomers could never adapt and would try to crawl on
all fours. They would manage to get their heads under, but their rear ends would be left stick- ing
out. And it is my opinion that the supreme prosecutor had a particularly difficult time adapting, and I
imagine that his rear end, not yet grown thin, used to stick out there for the greater glory of Soviet
justice. Sinful person that I am, I visualize with malice that rear end sticking out there, and through
the whole long description of these trials it somehow gives me solace. )

Yes, the prosecutor expounded, continuing along the same line, if all this about tortures was true,
then it was impossible to understand what could have induced all the defendants to con- fess,
unanimously and in chorus, without any arguments and deviations. Just where could such colossal
collusion have been carried out? After all, they had no chance to communicate with each other
during the interrogation period.

(Several pages further along, a witness who survived will tell us where.)

Now it is not for me to tell the reader but for the reader to tell me just what the notorious "riddle of
the Moscow trials of the thirties" consisted of. At first people were astounded at the Promparty trial,
and then that riddle was transferred to the trials of the Party leaders.

After all, they didn't put on trial in open court the two thousand who had been dragged into it, or
even two or three hundred, but only eight people. It is not as hard as all that to direct a chorus of
eight. And as for his choices, Krylenko was free to choose from thousands over a period of two
years. Pal- chinsky had not been broken, but had been shot — and posthum- ously named "the leader
of the Promparty," which is what he was called in the testimony, even though no word of his
survived.

And they had hoped to beat what they wanted out of Khrenni- kov, and Khrennikov didn't yield to
them either; therefore he appeared just once in the record — in a footnote in small type: "Khrennikov
died during the course of his interrogation." The small type you are using is for fools, but we at least
know, and we will write it in double-sized letters: TORTURED TO DEATH DURING
INTERROGATION. He, too, was posthum- ously named a leader of the Promparty, but there wasn't
one least little fact from him, not one tiny piece of testimony in the general chorus, not one. Because
he did not give even one! (And then all at once Ramzin appeared! He was a find. What energy and
what a grasp! And he was ready to do anything in order to live! And what talent! He had been
arrested only at the end of the summer, just before the trial really — and he not only man- aged to
enter fully into his role, but it seemed as though he had written the whole play. He had absorbed a
whole mountain of interrelated material, and he could serve it up spick-and-span, any name at all,
any fact at all. And sometimes he manifested the languid ornateness of a bigwig scientist: "The
activity of the Promparty was so widespread that even in the course of an eleven-day trial there is no
opportunity to disclose it in total detail.") (In other words, go on and look for it, look further!) "I am
firmly convinced that a small anti-Soviet stratum still exists in engineering circles." (Go get 'em, go



get 'em, grab some more!) And how capable he was: he knew that it was a riddle, and that a riddle
must be given an artistic explanation. And, unfeeling as a stick of wood, he found then and there
within himself "the traits of the Russian criminal, for whom purification lay in public recantation
before all the people."

[Ramzin has been undeservedly neglected in Russian memories. In my view, he fully deserved to
become the prototype of a cynical and dazzling traitor. The Bengal fire of betrayal! He wasn't the
only such villain of this epoch, but he was certainly a prominent case.]

So what it comes down to is that all Krylenko and the GPU had to do was select the right people. But
the risk was small. Goods spoiled in interrogation could always be sent off to the grave. And
whoever managed to get through both the frying pan and the fire could always be given medical
treatment and be fattened up, and put on public trial!

So then where is the riddle? How they were worked over? Very simply: Do you want to live? (And
even those who don't care about themselves care about their children or grandchildren.) Do you
understand that it takes absolutely no effort to have you shot, without your ever leaving the
courtyards of the GPU? (And there was no doubt whatever about that. Whoever hadn't yet learned it
would be given a course in being ground down by the Lubyanka.) But it is useful both for you and
for us to have you act out a certain drama, the text for which you, as specialists, are going to write
yourselves, and we, as prosecutors, are going to learn by heart . . . and we will try to remember the
technical terms. (Krylenko sometimes made mistakes during the trial. He said "freight car axle"
instead of "locomotive axle.") It will be unpleasant to perform and you will feel ashamed, but you
just have to suffer through it. After all, it is better to live. And what assurance have we that you won't
shoot us afterward? Why should we take vengeance on you? You are excellent specialists and you
have not committed any crimes and we value you. Look at how many wrecking trials there have
been; you'll see that no one who behaved has been shot. (Mercy for the defendants who cooperated
in one trial was an important prerequisite for the success of the next. And hope was transmitted via
this chain right up to Zinoviev and Kamenev themselves.) But the under- standing is that you have to
carry out all our conditions to the very last! The trial must work for the good of socialist society.

And the defendants would fulfill all the conditions.

Thus they served up all the subtlety of engineers' intellectual opposition as dirty wrecking on a level
low enough to be com- prehensible to the last illiterate in the country. (But they had not yet
descended to the level of ground glass in the food of the workers. The prosecutors had not yet
thought that one up.)

A further theme was ideological motivation. Had they begun to wreck? It was the result of a hostile
motivation. And now they jointly collaborated in confessing? It was once again the result of

ideological motivation, for they had been converted (in prison) by the blazing blast-furnace face of
the third year of the Five- Year Plan! Although in their last words they begged for their lives, that
wasn't the main thing for them. (Fedotov: "There is no forgiveness for us. The prosecutor is right!")
The main thing for these strange defendants right at that moment, on the threshold of death, was to
convince the people and the whole world of the infallibility and farsightedness of the Soviet govern-
ment. Ramzin, in particular, glorified the "revolutionary con- sciousness of the proletarian masses
and their leaders," who had been "able to find immeasurably more dependable paths of economic
policy" than the scientists, and who had calculated the tempos of economic growth rate far more
correctly. And then: "I had come to understand it was necessary to make a jump ahead, and that it
was necessary to make a leap forward, that it was necessary to capture by storm," etc., etc.

[Protsess Prompartii, p. 504. And that is how they were talking here in the Soviet Union, in our own
country, in 1930, when Mao Tse-tung was still a stripling.]



And Larichev declared: "The Soviet Union is invincible against the weakening capitalist world."
And Kalinnikov: "The dictatorship of the pro- letariat is an inevitable necessity." And further: "The
interests of the people and the interests of the Soviet government merge into one purposeful whole."
Yes, and in addition, in the country- side "the general line of the Party, the destruction of the kulaks,
is correct." They had time, while awaiting execution, to deliver themselves of judgments about
everything. And the repenting intellectuals even had enough voice for such a prophecy as this: "In
proportion to the development of society, individual life is going to become more circumscribed. . . .
Collective will is the highest form."

Thus it was that with eight-horse traction all the goals of the trial were attained:

1. All the shortages in the country, including famine, cold, lack of clothing, chaos, and obvious
stupidities, were blamed on the engineer- wreckers.

2. The people were terrified by the threat of imminent inter- vention from abroad and therefore
prepared for new sacrifices.

3. Leftist circles in the West were warned of the intrigues of their governments.

4. The solidarity of the engineers was destroyed; all the in- telligentsia was given a good scare and
left divided within itself. And so that there should be no doubt about it, this purpose of the trial was
once more clearly proclaimed by Ramzin:

"I would like to see that, in consequence of the present trial of the Promparty, the dark and shameful
past of the entire intelli- gentsia will be buried once and for all."29

Larichev joined in: "This caste must be destroyed! . . . There is not and there cannot be loyalty
among engineers!"30 And Och- kin too: The intelligentsia "is some kind of mush. As the state
accuser has said, it has no backbone, and this constitutes un- conditional spinelessness. . . . How
immeasurably superior is the sensitivity of the proletariat."

[Ibid., p. 509. For some reason, the main thing about the proletariat is always, believe it or not,
sensitivity. Always via the nostrils.]

So now just why should such diligent collaborators be shot?

And that was the way the history of our intelligentsia has been written for decades — from the
anathema of 1920 (the reader will remember: "not the brains of the nation, but shit," and "the ally of
the black generals," and "the hired agent of imperialism") right up to the anathema of 1930.

So should anyone be surprised that the word "intelligentsia" got established here in Russia as a term
of abuse.

That is how the public trials were manufactured. Stalin's searching mind had once and for all attained
its ideal. (Those blunderheads Hitler and Goebbels would come to envy it and rush into their
shameful failure with the burning of the Reichstag. )

The standard had been set, and now it could be retained perennially and performed over again every
season — according to the wishes of the Chief Producer. And in fact the Chief wanted another within
three months. The rehearsal time was very short, but that was all right. Come and see the show! Only
in our theater! A premiere.

M. The Case of the AU-Union Bureau of the Mensheviks— March 1-9, 1931



The case was heard by a Special Assize of the Supreme Court, the presiding judge in this case, for
some reason, being N. M. Shvemik. Otherwise everyone was in his proper place — Antonov-
Saratovsky, Krylenko, and his assistant Roginsky. The pro- ducers were sure of themselves. For after
all, the subject wasn't technical but was Party material, ordinary stuff. So they brought fourteen
defendants onto the stage.

And it all went off not just smoothly but brilliantly.

I was twelve at the time. For three years I had been attentively reading everything about politics on
the enormous pages of Izvestiya. I read the stenographic records of these two trials line by line. In the
Promparty case, I had already felt, in my boyish heart, superfluity, falsehood, fabrication, but at least
there were spectacular stage sets — universal intervention, the paralysis of all industry, the
distribution of ministerial portfolios! In the trial of the Mensheviks, all the same stage sets were
brought out, but they were more pallid. And the actors spoke their lines with- out enthusiasm. And
the whole performance was a yawning bore, an inept, tired repetition. (Could it be that Stalin felt
this, too, through his rhinoceros hide? How else can one explain his call- ing off the case of the
Working Peasants Party after it had already been prepared, or why there were no more trials for
several years?)

It would be boring to base our interpretations once again on the stenographic record. In any case, I
have fresher evidence from one of the principal defendants in this case — Mikhail Petrovich
Yakubovich. At the present moment, his petition for rehabilitation, exposing all the dirty work which
went on, has filtered through to samizdat, our savior, and people are reading it just as it happened.

[He was refused rehabilitation. After all, the case in which he was tried had entered the golden tables
of our history. After all, one cannot take back even one stone, because the entire building might
collapse. Thus it is that M.P.Y. still has his conviction on his record. However, for his insolation, he
has been granted a personal pension for his revolutionary activity! What monstrosities exist in our
country.]

His story offers material proof and ex- planation of the whole chain of Moscow trials of the thirties.

How was the nonexistent "Union Bureau" created? The GPU had been given an assignment: they
had been told to prove that the Mensheviks had adroitly wormed their way into — and seized — many
important government jobs for counterrevolutionary purposes. The genuine situation did not jibe
with this plan. There were no real Mensheviks in important posts. But then there were no real
Mensheviks on trial either. (True, they say V. K. Ikov actually was a member of the quiet, do-
nothing illegal Moscow Bureau of the Mensheviks — but they didn't know that at the trial. He was
processed in the second echelon and received a mere eight.) The GPU had its own design: two from
the Supreme Council of the Economy, two from the People's Commissariat of Trade, two from the
State Bank, one from the Central Union of Consumer Cooperatives, one from the State Planning
Com- mission. (What a boring and unoriginal plan! Back in 1920, they had ordered, in the matter of
the "Tactical Center," that it include two from the Union of Rebirth, two from the Council of Public
Figures, two from this and that, etc.) Therefore they picked the individuals who suited them on the
basis of their positions. And whether they were Mensheviks or not depended on whether one
believed rumors. Some who got caught this way were not Mensheviks at all, but directives had been
given to consider them Mensheviks. The genuine political views of those accused did not interest the
GPU in the least. Not all the de- fendants even knew each other. And they raked in Menshevik
witnesses, too, wherever they could find them.

[One was Kuzma A. Gvozdev, a man whose fate was bitter. This was the same Gvozdev who had
been chairman of the workers' group in the War Industry Committee, and whom the Tsarist
government, in an excess of stupidity, had arrested in 1916, and the February Revolution had made
Min- ister of Labor. Gvozdev became one of the martyr long-termers of Gulag. I do not know how



many years he had been imprisoned before 1930, but from 1930 on he was in prison continuously,
and my friends knew him in .Spassk Camp, in Kazakhstan, as late as 1952.]

(All the wit- nesses, without exception, were later given prison terms too.) Ramzin testified
prolifically and obligingly at this trial also. But the GPU pinned its hopes on the principal defendant,
Vladimir Gustavovich Groman (with the idea that he would help work up this case and be amnestied
in return), and on the provocateur Petunin. (I am basing all this on Yakubovich's report.)

Let us now introduce M. P. Yakubovich. He had begun his revolutionary activity so early that he had
not even finished the gymnasium. In March, 1917, he was already Chairman of the Smolensk Soviet.
Impelled by the strength of his convictions, which continued to lead him on, he became a strong and
success- ful orator. At the Congress of the Western Front, he impetuously called those journalists
who were demanding that the war con- tinue enemies of the people. And this was in April, 1917. He
was nearly hauled from the rostrum, and he apologized, but there- after in his speech he maneuvered
so adroitly and so won over his listeners that at the end he called them enemies of the people again,
and this time to stormy applause. He was elected to the delegation sent to the Petrograd Soviet, and
hardly had he arrived there than — with the informality of those days — he was named to the Military
Commission of the Petrograd Soviet. There he exerted a strong influence on the appointment of army
com- missars, [He is not to be confused with Colonel Yakubovich of the General Staff, who, at the
same time and the same meetings, represented the War Ministry.] and in the end he became an army
commissar on the Southwestern Front and personally arrested Denikin in Vinnitsa (after the
Kornilov revolt), and regretted very much indeed (during the trial as well) that he had not shot him
on the spot.

Clear-eyed, always sincere, and always completely absorbed in his own ideas — whether they were
right or wrong — he was counted as — and was — one of the younger members of the Men- shevik
Party. This did not prevent him, however, from presenting his own projects to the Menshevik
leadership with boldness and passion, such as, in the spring of 1917, proposing the formation of a
Social Democratic government, or, in 1919, recommending that the Mensheviks enter the
Comintern. (Dan and the others invariably rejected all his plans and their variations, and quite
condescendingly, for that matter.) In July, 1917, he was very pained by the action of the socialist
Petrograd Soviet in approv- ing the Provisional Government's calling up army units for use against
other socialists, considering it a fatal error even though the other socialists were using armed force.
Hardly had the Octo- ber coup taken place than Yakubovich proposed to his party that it should
support the Bolsheviks wholeheartedly and work to improve the state structure they were creating. In
the upshot, he was finally ostracized by Martov, and by 1920 he had left the ranks of the Mensheviks
once and for all, convinced that he could not get them to follow the Bolsheviks' path.

I have gone into all this detail to make it quite clear that throughout the Revolution Yakubovich had
been not a Men- shevik but a Bolshevik, and one who was entirely sincere and disinterested. In 1920
he was still one of the Smolensk food- supply commissars, and the only one of them who was not a
Bolshevik. He was even honored by the People's Commissariat of Food Supply as the best. (He
claims that he got along without reprisals against the peasantry, but I do not know whether or not this
is true. At his trial he did, however, recall that he had organized "antispeculation" detachments.) In
the twenties he had edited the Torgovaya Gazeta (The Trade Gazette) and had occupied other
important posts. He had been arrested in 1930 when just such Mensheviks as he, "who had wormed
their way in," were to be rounded up in accordance with the GPU plans.

He had immediately been called in for questioning by Krylen- ko, who, earlier and always, as the
reader already knows, was organizing the chaos of the preliminary inquiry into efficient
interrogation. It turned out that they knew one another very well, for in the years between the first
trials Krylenko had gone to that very Smolensk Province to improve food-requisition work. And here
is what Krylenko now said:



"Mikhail Petrovich, I am going to talk to you frankly: I con- sider you a Communist! [His words
encouraged Yakubovich and raised his spirits greatly.] / have no doubt of your innocence. But it is
our Party duty, yours and mine, to carry out this trial. [Krylenko had gotten his orders from Stalin,
and Yakubovich was all atremble for the sake of the cause, like a zealous horse rushing into the
horse collar.] I beg you to help me in every possible way, and to assist the interrogation. And in case
of un- foreseen difficulties during the trial, at the most difficult moments, I will ask the chairman of
the court to give you the floor." ! ! ! !

And Yakubovich promised. Conscious of his duty, he promised. Indeed, the Soviet government had
never before given him such a responsible assignment.

And thus there was not the slightest need even to touch Yakubovich during the interrogation. But
that was too subtle for the GPU. Like everyone else, Yakubovich was handed over to the butcher-
interrogators, and they gave him the full treatment — the freezing punishment cell, the hot box,
beating his genitals. They tortured him so intensively that Yakubovich and his fellow defendant
Abram Ginzburg opened their veins in desperation. After they had received medical attention, they
were no longer tortured and beaten. Instead, the only thing to which they were subjected was two
weeks of sleeplessness. (Yakubovich says: "Just to be allowed to sleep! Neither conscience nor
honor matters any longer.") And then they were confronted with others who had already given in and
who urged them to "confess" ... to utter nonsense. And the interrogator himself, Aleksei Alekseye-
vich Nasedkin, said: "I know, I know, none of this actually happened! But they insist on it!"

On one occasion when Yakubovich had been summoned to interrogation, he found there a prisoner
who had been tortured. The interrogator smiled ironically: "Moisei Isayevich Teitel- baum begs you
to take him into your anti-Soviet organization. You can speak as freely as you please. I am going out
for a while." He went out. Teitelbaum really did beg: "Comrade Yakubovich! I beg you, please take
me into your Union Bureau of Mensheviks! They are accusing me of taking 'bribes from foreign
firms' and threatening me with execution. But I would rather die a counterrevolutionary than a
common criminal!" (It was likelier that they had promised him that as a counter- revolutionary he
wouldn't be shot! And he wasn't wrong either: they gave him a juvenile prison term, a "fiver.") The
GPU was so short on Mensheviks they had to recruit defendants from volunteers! (And, after all,
Teitelbaum was being groomed for an important role — communication with the Mensheviks abroad
and with the Second International! But they honorably kept the deal they had made with him — a
"fiver.") And with the inter- rogator's approval Yakubovich accepted Teitelbaum as a mem- ber of
the Union Bureau.

Several days before the trial began, the, first organizing session of the Union Bureau of the
Mensheviks convened in the office of the senior interrogator, Dmitri Matveyevich Dmitriyev — so as
to coordinate things, and so that each should understand his own role better. (That's how the Central
Committee of the Prom- party convened too! That's where the defendants "could have met" — to
answer Krylenko's earlier leading question.) But such a mountain of falsehood had been piled up that
it was too much to absorb in one session and the participants got things mixed up, couldn't master it
in one rehearsal, and were called together a second time.

What did Yakubovich feel as he went into the trial? Should he not, in revenge for all the tortures to
which he had been sub- jected, for all the falsehood shoved into his breast, create a sensational
scandal and startle the world? But still:

1. To do so would be to stab the Soviet government in the back! It would be to negate his entire
purpose in life, everything he had lived for, the whole path he had taken to extricate himself from
mistaken Menshevism and become a right-minded Bol- shevik.

2. After a scandal like that they wouldn't just allow him to die; they wouldn't just shoot him; they
would torture him again, but this time out of vengeance, and drive him insane. But his body had



already been exhausted by tortures. Where could he find the moral strength to endure new ones?
Where could he unearth the required heroism?

(I wrote down his arguments as his heated words rang out — this being a most extraordinary chance
to get, so to speak, a "posthumous" explanation from a participant in such a trial. And I find that it is
altogether as though Bukharin or Rykov were explaining the reasons for their own mysterious
submis- siveness at their trials. Theirs were the same sincerity and honesty, the same devotion to the
Party, the same human weak- ness, the same lack of the moral strength needed to fight back, because
they had no individual position. )

And at the trial Yakubovich not only repeated obediently all the gray mass of lies which constituted
the upper limit of Stalin's imagination — and the imagination of his apprentices and his tormented
defendants. But he also played out his inspired role, as he had promised Krylenko.

The so-called Foreign Delegation of the Mensheviks — in es- sence the entire top level of their
Central Committee — formally dissociated themselves from the defendants in a statement pub- lished
in Vorwdrts. They declared there that the trial was a shameful travesty, built on the testimony of
provocateurs and unfortunate defendants forced into it by terror; that the over- whelming majority of
the defendants had left the Party more than ten years earlier and had never returned; and that
absurdly large sums of money were referred to at the trial, representing more than the party had ever
disposed of.

And Krylenko, having read the article, asked Shvernik to permit the defendants to reply — the same
kind of pulUng-all- strings-at-once he had resorted to at the trial of the Promparty. They all spoke up,
and they all defended the methods of the GPU against the Menshevik Central Committee.

But what does Yakubovich remember today about his "reply" and his last speech? He recalls that he
not only spoke as befitted his promise to Krylenko, but that instead of simply getting to his feet, he
was seized and lifted up — like a chip on a wave — by a surge of anger and oratory. Anger against
whom? After having learned what torture meant, and attempting suicide and coming close to death
more than once, he was at this point in a real, honest-to-God rage. But not at the prosecutor or the
GPU! Oh, no! At the Foreign Delegation of the Mensheviks! ! ! Now there's a psychological switch
for you! There they sat, unscrupulous and smug, in security and comfort — for even the poverty of
emigre life was, of course, comfort in comparison with the Lubyanka. And how could they refuse to
pity those who were on trial, their torture and suffering? How could they so impudently dissociate
themselves from them and deliver these unfortunates over to their fate? (The reply Yakubovich
delivered was powerful, and the people who had cooked up the trial were delighted.)

Even when he was describing this in 1967, Yakubovich shook with rage at the Foreign Delegation, at
their betrayal, their repudiation, their treason to the socialist Revolution — exactly as he had
reproached them in 1917.

I did not have the stenographic record of the trial at the time. Later I found it and was astonished.
Yakubovich's memory — so precise in every little detail, every date, every name — had in this instance
betrayed him. He had, after all, said at the trial that the Foreign Delegation, on orders from the
Second International, had instructed them to carry out wrecking activities. He no longer remembered
this. The foreign Mensheviks' statement was neither unscrupulous nor smug. They had indeed pitied
the unfortunate victims of the trial but did point out that they had not been Mensheviks for a long
time — which was quite true. What was it, then, that made Yakubovich so unalterably and sincerely
angry? And exactly how could the Foreign Delegation not have con- signed the defendants to their
fate?

We like to take our anger out on those who are weaker, those who cannot answer. It is a human trait.
And somehow the argu- ments to prove we are right appear out of nowhere.



Krylenko said in his summation for the prosecution that Yakubovich was a fanatic advocate of
counterrevolutionary ideas and demanded therefore that he be shot.

And Yakubovich that day felt a tear of gratitude roll down his cheek, and he feels it still to this day,
after having dragged his way through many camps and detention prisons. Even today he is grateful
to Krylenko for not humiliating him, for not in- suiting him, for not ridiculing him as a defendant,
and for call- ing him correctly di fanatic advocate (even of an idea contrary to his real one) and for
demanding simple, noble execution for him, that would put an end to all his sufferings! In his final
statement, Yakubovich agreed with Krylenko himself: "The crimes to which I have confessed [he
endowed with great sig- nificance his success in hitting on the expression 'to which I have
confessed' — anyone who understood would realize that he meant 'not those which I committed']
deserve the highest measure of punishment — and I do not ask any forgiveness! I do not ask that my
life be spared!" (Beside him on the defendants' bench, Gro- man got excited! "You are insane! You
have to consider your comrades. You don't have the right!")

Now wasn't he a find for the prosecutor?

And can one still say the trials of 1936 to 1938 are un- explained?

Was it not through this trial that Stalin came to understand and believe that he could readily round up
all his loud-mouth enemies and get them organized for just such a performance as this?

And may my compassionate reader now have mercy on me! Until now my pen sped on untrembling,
my heart didn't skip a beat, and we slipped along unconcerned, because for these fifteen years we
have been firmly protected either by legal revolution- ality or else by revolutionary legality. But
from now on things will be painful: as the reader will recollect, as we have had ex- plained to us
dozens of times, beginning with Khrushchev, "from approximately 1934, violations of Leninist
norms of legality began." And how are we to enter this abyss of illegality now? How are we to drag
our way along yet another bitter stretch of the road?

However, these trials which follow were, because of the fame of the defendants, a cynosure for the
whole world. They did not escape the attention of the public. They were written about. They were
interpreted and they will be interpreted again and again. It is for us merely to touch lightly on their
riddle.

Let us make one qualification, though not a big one; the published stenographic records did not
coincide completely with what was said at the trials. One writer who received an entrance pass —
they were given out only to selected individuals — took running notes and subsequently discovered
these differences. All the correspondents also noted the snag with Krestinsky, which made a recess
necessary in order to get him back on the track of his assigned testimony. (Here is how I picture it.
Before the trial a chart was set up for emergencies: in the first column was the name of the
defendant; in the second, the method to be used during the recess if he should depart from his text
during the open trial; in the third column, the name of the Chekist respon- sible for applying the
indicated method. So if Krestinsky de- parted from his text, then who would come on the run and
what that person would do had already been arranged.)

But the inaccuracies of the stenographic record do not change or lighten the picture. Dumfounded,
the world watched three plays in a row, three wide-ranging and expensive dramatic pro- ductions in
which the powerful leaders of the fearless Communist Party, who had turned the entire world upside
down and terrified it, now marched forth Uke doleful, obedient goats and bleated out everything they
had been ordered to, vomited all over them- selves, cringingly abased themselves and their
convictions, and confessed to crimes they could not in any wise have committed.

This was unprecedented in remembered history. It was par- ticularly astonishing in contrast with the



recent Leipzig trial of Dimitrov. Dimitrov had answered the Nazi judges like a roaring lion, and,
immediately afterward, his comrades in Moscow, mem- bers of that same unyielding cohort which
had made the whole world tremble — and the greatest of them at that, those who had been called the
"Leninist guard" — came before the judges drenched in their own urine.

And even though much appears to have been clarified since then — with particular success by Arthur
Koestler — the riddle continues to circulate as durably as ever.

People have speculated about a Tibetan potion that deprives a man of his will, and about the use of
hypnosis. Such explana- tions must by no means be rejected: if the NKVD possessed such methods,
clearly there were no moral rules to prevent resorting to them. Why not weaken or muddle the will?
And it is a known fact that in the twenties some leading hypnotists gave up their careers and entered
the service of the GPU. It is also reliably known that in the thirties a school for hypnotists existed in
the NKVD. Kamenev's wife was allowed to visit her husband before his trial and found him not
himself, his reactions retarded. (And she managed to communicate this to others before she herself
was arrested.)

But why was neither Palchinsky nor Khrennikov broken by the Tibetan potion or hypnosis?

The fact is that an explanation on a higher, psychological plane is called for.

One misunderstanding in particular results from the image of these men as old revolutionaries who
had not trembled in Tsarist dungeons — seasoned, tried and true, hardened, etc., fighters. But there is
a plain and simple mistake here. These de- fendants were not those old revolutionaries. They had
acquired that glory by inheritance from and association with the Narod- niks, the SR's, and the
Anarchists. They were the ones, the bomb throwers and the conspirators, who had known hard-labor
im- prisonment and real prison terms — but even they had never in their lives experienced a genuinely
merciless interrogation (be- cause such a thing did not exist at all in Tsarist Russia). And these
others, the Bolshevik defendants at the treason trials, had never known either interrogation or real
prison terms. The Bol- sheviks had never been sentenced to special "dungeons," any Sakhalin, any
special hard labor in Yakutsk. It is well known that Dzerzhinsky had the hardest time of them all,
that he had spent all his life in prisons. But, according to our yardstick, he had served just a normal
"tenner" just a simple "ten-ruble bill, " like any ordinary collective farmer in our time. True,
included in that tenner were three years in the hard-labor central prison, but that is nothing special
either.

The Party leaders who were the defendants in the trials of 1936 to 1938 had, in their revolutionary
pasts, known short, easy imprisonment, short periods in exile, and had never even had a whiff of
hard labor. Bukharin had many petty arrests on his record, but they amounted to nothing.
Apparently, he was never imprisoned anywhere for a whole year at a time, and he had just a wee bit
of exile on Onega.

[All the information here comes from Volume 41 of the Granat Encyclo- pedia, in which either
autobiographical or reliable biographical essays on the leaders of the Russian Communist Party
(Bolsheviks) are collected.]

Kamenev, despite long years of propaganda work and travel to all the cities of Russia, spent only
two years in prison and one and a half years in exile. In our time, even sixteen-year-old kids got five
right off. Zinoviev, believe it or not, never spent as much as three months in prison. He never
received even one sentence! In comparison with the ordinary natives of our Archipelago they were
all callow youths; they didn't know what prison was like. Rykov and I. N. Smimov had been arrested
several times and had been imprisoned for five years, but somehow they went through prison very
easily, and they either escaped from exile without any trouble at all or were released because of an
amnesty. Until they were arrested and imprisoned in the Lubyanka, they hadn't the slightest idea



what a real prison was nor what the jaws of unjust interrogation were like. (There is no basis for
assuming that if Trotsky had fallen into those jaws, he would have conducted himself with any less
self-abasement, or that his resistance would have proved stronger than theirs. He had had no
occasion to prove it. He, too, had known only easy imprisonment, no serious interrogations, and a
mere two years of exile in Ust-Kut. The terror Trotsky inspired as Chairman of the Revolutionary
Military Council was some- thing he acquired very cheaply, and does not at all demonstrate any true
strength of character or courage. Those who have con- demned many others to be shot often wilt at
the prospect of their own death. The two kinds of toughness are not connected. ) And as for Radek —
he was a plain provocateur. (And he wasn't the only one in these three trials!) And Yagoda was an
inveterate, habitual criminal.

(This murderer of millions simply could not imagine that his superior Murderer, up top, would not,
at the last moment, stand up for him and protect him. Just as though Stalin had been sitting right
there in the hall, Yagoda confidently and insistently begged him directly for mercy: 'T appeal to you!
For you I built two great canals! " And a witness reports that at just that moment a match flared in the
shadows behind a window on the second floor of the hall, apparently behind a musUn curtain, and,
while it lasted, the outline of a pipe could be seen. Whoever has been in Bakhchisarai may remember
that Oriental trick. The second- floor windows in the Hall of Sessions of the State Council are
covered with iron sheets pierced by small holes, and behind them is an unlit gallery. It is never
possible to guess down in the hall itself whether someone is up there or not. The Khan remained
invisible, and the Council always met as if in his presence. Given Stalin's out-and-out Oriental
character, I can readily be- lieve that he watched the comedies in that October Hall. I cannot imagine
that he would have denied himself this spectacle, this satisfaction. )

And, after all, our entire failure to understand derives from our belief in the unusual nature of these
people. We do not, after all, where ordinary confessions signed by ordinary citizens are concerned,
find their reasons for denouncing themselves and others so fulsomely baffling. We accept it as
something we under- stand: a human being is weak; a human being gives in. But we consider
Bukharin, Zinoviev, Kamenev, Pyatakov, I. N. Smirnov to be supermen to begin with — and, in
essence, our failure to understand is due to that fact alone.

True, the directors of this dramatic production seem to have had a harder task in selecting the
performers than they'd had in the earlier trials of the engineers: in those trials they had forty barrels
to pick from, so to speak, whereas here the available troupe was small. Everyone knew who the chief
performers were, and the audience wanted to see them in the roles and them only.

Yet there was a choice! The most farsighted and determined of those who were doomed did not
allow themselves to be arrested. They committed suicide first (Skrypnik, Tomsky, Gamarnik). It was
the ones who wanted to live who allowed themselves to be arrested. And one could certainly braid a
rope from the ones who wanted to live! But even among them some behaved differ- ently during the
interrogations, realized what was happening, turned stubborn, and died silently but at least not
shamefully. For some reason, they did not, after all, put on public trial Rudzutak, Postyshev,
Yenukidze, Chubar, Kosior, and, for that matter, Krylenko himself, even though their names would
have embellished the trials.

They put on trial the most compliant. A selection was made after all.

The men selected were drawn from a lower order, but, on the other hand, the mustached Producer
knew each of them very well. He also knew that on the whole they were weaklings, and he knew,
one by one, the particular weaknesses of each. Therein lay his dark and special talent, his main
psychological bent and his life's achievement: to see people's weaknesses on the lowest plane of
being.

And the man who seems, in the perspective of time, to have embodied the highest and brightest



intelligence of all the dis- graced and executed leaders (and to whom Arthur Koestler ap- parently
dedicated his talented inquiry) was N. I. Bukharin. Stalin saw through him, too, at that lowest
stratum at which the human being unites with the earth; and Stalin held him in a long death grip,
playing with him as a cat plays with a mouse, letting him go just a little, and then catching him
again. Bukharin wrote every last word of our entire existing — in other words, nonexist- ent —
Constitution, which is so beautiful to listen to. And he flew about up there, just below the clouds, and
thought that he had outplayed Koba: that he had thrust a constitution on him that would compel him
to relax the dictatorship. And at that very moment, he himself had already been caught in those jaws.

Bukharin did not like Kamenev and Zinoviev, and way back, when they had first been tried, after the
murder of Kirov, he had said to people close to him: "Well, so what? That's the kind of people they
were; maybe there was something to it. . . ." (That was the classic formula of the philistine in those
years: "There was probably something to it. ... In our country they don't arrest people for nothing."
And that was said in 1935 by the lead- ing theoretician of the Party! ) He spent the period of the
second trial of Kamenev and Zinoviev, in the summer of 1936, hunting in the Tien Shan, and knew
nothing about it. He came down from the mountains to Frunze — and there he read that the death sen-
tence had been imposed on both men, and read the newspaper articles which made clear what
annihilating testimony they had given against him. But did he hasten to stop that act of repres- sion?
And did he protest to the Party that something monstrous was being done? No, all he did was send
Koba a telegram asking him to postpone the execution of Kamenev and Zinoviev so that he,
Bukharin, could get there to confront them and prove himself innocent.

It was too late! Koba had enough of the sworn testimony; why did he need living confrontations?

However, they still didn't arrest Bukharin for a long time. He lost his job as editor-in-chief of
Izvestiya and all his other Party assignments and jobs, and he lived for half a year in his Kremlin
apartment — in the Poteshny Palace of Peter the Great — as if in prison. (However, in the autumn he
used to go to his dacha — and the Kremlin guards would salute him as though nothing at all had
changed.) No one visited him or phoned him any longer. And all during these months he wrote
endless letters: "Dear Koba! Dear Koba! Dear Koba!" And he got not one reply.

He was still trying to establish friendly contact with Stalin!

And Dear Koba, squinting, was already staging rehearsals. For many long years Koba had been
holding tryouts for various roles, and he knew that Bukharchik would play his part beauti- fully. He
had, after all, already renounced those of his pupils and supporters who had been arrested and
exiled — they were few in number in any case — and had allowed them to be destroyed.

[The only one he defended was Yefim TseitUn — but not for long.]

He had stood by and allowed his own line of thinking to be wiped out and pilloried before it was
fully developed and bom. And more recently, while he was still editor-in-chief of Izvestiya and a
member of the Politburo, he had accepted as legal the execution of Kamenev and Zinoviev. Neither
at the top of his lungs nor even in a whisper had he expressed any indignation over that. And yet
these had all been tryouts for his own future role.

Way back in the past, when Stalin had threatened to expel him (and all the rest of them) from the
Party, Bukharin (like all the rest) had renounced his views in order to remain in the Party. And that,
too, had been a tryout for his role. If that was how they acted while still in freedom and still at the
height of honor and power, then they could certainly be depended on to follow the script of the play
faultlessly when their body, their food, and their sleep were in the hands of the Lubyanka prompters.

And what did Bukharin fear most in those months before his arrest? It is reliably known that above
all he feared expulsion from the Party! Being deprived of the Party! Being left alive but outside the



Party! And Dear Koba had played magnificently on this trait of his (as he had with them all) from
the very moment he had himself become the Party. Bukharin (like all the rest of them) did not have
his own individual point of view. They didn't have their own genuine ideology of opposition, on the
strength of which they could step aside and on which they could take their stand. Before they became
an opposition, Stalin de- clared them to be one, and by this move he rendered them power- less. And
all their efforts were directed toward staying in the Party. And toward not harming the Party at the
same time!

These added up to too many different obligations for them to be independent.

In essence, Bukharin had been allotted the starring role, and nothing was to be overlooked or
abridged in the Producer's work with him, in the working of time on him, and in his own getting used
to the role. Even sending him to Europe the previous win- ter to acquire manuscripts by Marx had
been essential — not just superficially, for the sake of the whole network of accusations about his
establishing contacts, but so that the aimless freedom of life on tour might all the more insistently
demand his return to the main stage. And now, beneath black thunderclouds of accusations, came the
long, the interminable state of nonarrest, of exhausting housebound lethargy, which ground down the
will power of the victim even more effectively than the direct pressure of the Lubyanka. (Nor would
the Lubyanka run away either — it, too, would last for a year. )

On one occasion, Bukharin was summoned by Kaganovich, who arranged a confrontation between
him and Sokolnikov in the presence of high-ranking Chekists. Sokolnikov gave testimony about "the
parallel Rightist Center" (parallel, in other words, to that of the Trotskyites), and about Bukharin's
underground activity. Kaganovich conducted the interrogation aggressively and then ordered
Sokolnikov to be taken away. And he said to Bukharin in a friendly tone: "He lies in his teeth, the
whore!"

Despite that, the newspapers continued to report the indigna- tion of the masses. Bukharin
telephoned the Central Committee. Bukharin wrote letters beginning "Dear Koba," in which he
begged that the accusations against him be publicly denied. And then the prosecutor's office
published a roundabout declaration: "Objective proofs for the indictment of Bukharin have not been
found."

Radek telephoned him in the fall, wanting to see him. Bukharin shunned him: We are both being
accused; why add another cloud? But their Izvestiya country houses were next to each other, and
Radek dropped in on him one evening: "No matter what I may say later on, please know that I am
not to blame for anything. And anyway you will come out of it whole: you were not con- nected with
the Trotskyites."

And Bukharin believed he would come out of it whole and that he would not be expelled from the

Party. For that would be monstrous! In actuality, he had always been hostile to the Trotskyites: they
had put themselves outside the Party and look what had come of it! They had to stick together. Even
if they made mistakes, they had to stick together on that too.

At the November demonstration (his farewell to Red Square), he and his wife went to the reviewing
stand for guests on his newspaper editor's press card. All at once an armed soldier came up to him.
His heart stopped! They were going to do it here? At a time like this? No. The soldier saluted:
"Comrade Stalin is sur- prised at your being here. He asks you to take your place on the
mausoleum."

And that's the way they tossed him back and forth from hot to cold for the entire half-year. On
December 5 they adopted the Bukharin constitution with fanfare and celebration and named it the
Stalinist Constitution for all eternity. At the December Plenum of the Central Committee, they
brought in Pyatakov, with his teeth knocked out, and not a bit like himself. Behind his back stood



silent Chekists (Yagoda men, and Yagoda, after all, was also being tested and prepared for a role).
Pyatakov delivered himself of the most repulsive sort of testimony against Bukharin and Rykov,
both of whom were sitting right there among the leaders. Ordzhonikidze put his hand up to his ear
(he was hard of hearing): "See here, are you giving all this testimony voluntarily?" (Note that down!
Ordzhonikidze will get a bullet of his own!) "Absolutely voluntarily" — and Pyatakov swayed on his
feet. And during the recess, Rykov said to Bu- kharin: "Tomsky had will power. He understood it all
back in August, and he ended his own life. While you and I, like fools, have gone on living."

At this point Kaganovich made an angry, condemnatory speech (he wanted so much to believe in
Bukharchik's innocence, but he couldn't any longer). And then Molotov. And then Stalin! What a
generous heart! What a memory for the good things! "Nonetheless, I consider that Bukharin's guilt
has not yet been proven. Perhaps Rykov is guilty, but not Bukharin." (Someone had drawn up
charges against Bukharin against his will! )

From cold to hot. That's how will power collapses. That's how to grow used to the role of a ruined
hero.

And then they began to bring to his home day after day the records of interrogations: the depositions
of young ex-students in the Institute of Red Professors, of Radek, and all the rest of them. And they
all provided the gravest proofs of Bukharin's black treason. They took these documents to his home,
not as if he were a defendant — oh, by no means! Merely in his position as a member of the Central
Committee — merely for his informa- tion.

Usually, when he received a new batch of these materials, Bu- kharin would say to his twenty-two-
year-old wife, who only that spring had given him a son: "You read them. I can't." And he would
bury his head in his pillow. He had two revolvers at home. (Stalin was giving him time too.) And yet
he did not commit suicide.

Is it not clear that he had grown used to his ordained role?

And one more public trial took place. And they shot one more batch of defendants. And yet they
continued to be merciful to Bukharin. They had not taken Bukharin.

At the beginning of February, 1937, he decided to go on a hunger strike at home, in order to force
the Central Committee to hold a hearing and clear him of the charges against him. He announced it
in a letter to "Dear Koba," and he honestly went through with it too. Then a Plenum of the Central
Committee was convened with the following agenda: (1) the crimes of the Rightist Center, (2) the
anti-Party conduct of Comrade Bu- kharin, as evidenced by his hunger strike.

Bukharin hesitated. Had he perhaps really insulted the Party in some particular way? Unshaven, thin,
wan, already a prisoner in appearance, he dragged himself along to the Plenum. "What on earth were
you thinking of?" Dear Koba asked him cordially. "But what was I to do in the face of such
accusations? They want to expel me from the Party." Stalin made a wry face at the absurdity: "Come
on, now. No one is going to expel you from the Party!"

Bukharin believed him and revived. He willingly assured the Plenum of his repentance, and
immediately abandoned his hunger strike. (At home he said: "Come on now, cut me some sausage!
Koba said they wouldn't expel me.") But in the course of the Plenum, Kaganovich and Molotov
(impudent fellows they were, indeed! — paid no attention to Stalin's opinion!) both called Bukharin a
Fascist hireling and demanded that he be shot.

[See what a wealth of information we are deprived of because we're protecting Molotov's noble old
age.]



And once again Bukharin's spirits fell, and in his last days he began to compose his "Letter to the
Future Central Committee." Committed to memory and thereby preserved, it recently became known
to the whole world. However, it did not shake the world to its foundations.

[Nor did it shake the "Future Central Committee" either.]

For what were the last words this brilliant theoretician decided to hand down to future generations?
Just one more cry of anguish and a plea to be restored to the Party. (He paid dearly in shame for that
devotion!) And one more affirmation that he "fully approved" everything that had hap- pened up to
and including 1937. And that included not only all the previous jeeringly mocking trials, but also all
the foul-smelling waves of our great prison sewage disposal system.

And that is how he himself certified that he, too, deserved to plunge into those waves.

So, at long last, he had matured to the point of being turned over to the prompters and the assistant
producers — this muscular man, this hunter and wrestler! (In playful tussles in the presence of the
Central Committee, how many times had he landed Stalin flat on his back! And this, too, was
probably something Koba couldn't forgive him.)

And in the case of one so fully prepared, so demolished, that no torture was called for, how was his
position any stronger than that of Yakubovich in 1931? How could he not be susceptible to the same
two arguments? He was in fact much weaker, because Yakubovich longed for death, and Bukharin
dreaded it.

There remained an easy dialogue with Vyshinsky along set Unes:

"Is it true that every opposition to the Party is a struggle against the Party?" "In general it is, factually
it is." "But a struggle against the Party cannot help but grow into a war against the Party."
"According to the logic of things — yes, it must." "And that means that in the end, given the existence
of oppositionist beliefs, any foul deeds whatever might be perpetrated against the Party [es- pionage,
murder, sellout of the Motherland]?" "But wait a minute, none were actually committed." "But they
could have been?" "Well, theoretically speaking." (Those are your theoreticians for you!) "But for us
the highest of all interests are those of the Party?" "Yes, of course, of course!" "So you see, only a
very fine distinction separates us. We are required to concretize the eventu- ality: in the interest of
discrediting for the future any idea of opposition, we are required to accept as having taken place
what could only theoretically have taken place. After all, it could have, couldn't it?" "It could have."
"And so it is necessary to recognize as actual what was possible; that's all. It's a small phi- losophical
transition. Are we in agreement? . . . Yes, and one thing more, and it's not for me to explain to you,
but if you re- treat and say something different during the trial, you understand that it will only play
into the hands of the world bourgeoisie and will only do the Party harm. Well, and it's clear that in
that case you yourself will not die an easy death. But if everything goes off all right, we will, of
course, allow you to go on living. We'll send you in secret to the island of Monte Cristo, and you can
work on the economics of socialism there." "But in previous trials, as I understand it, you did shoot
them all?" "But what comparison is there between you and them! And then, we also left many of
them alive too. They were shot only in the newspapers."

And so perhaps there isn't any insoluble riddle?

It was all that same invincible theme song, persisting with only minor variations through so many
different trials: "After all, we and you are Communists! How could you have gotten off the track and
come out against us? Repent! After all, you and we together — is us!"

Historical comprehension ripens slowly in a society. And when it does ripen, it is so simple. Neither
in 1922, nor in 1924, nor in 1937 were the defendants able to hang onto their own point of view so



firmly that they could raise their heads and shout, in reply to that bewitching and anesthetizing
melody:

"No, we are not revolutionaries with you! No, we are not Rus- sians with you! No, we are not
Communists with you!"

It would seem that if only that kind of shout had been raised, all the stage sets would have collapsed,
the plaster masks would have fallen off, the Producer would have fled down the backstairs, and the
prompters would have sneaked off into their ratholes. And out of doors it would have been, say,
1967!

But even the most superbly successful of these theatrical pro- ductions was expensive and
troublesome. And Stalin decided not to use open trials any longer.

Or rather in 1937 he probably did have a plan for holding public trials on a wide scale in the local
districts — so the black soul of the opposition would be made visible to the masses. But he couldn't
find producers who were good enough. It wasn't practical to prepare things so carefully, and the
mental processes of the accused weren't so complex, and Stalin only got into a mess, although very
few people know about it. The whole plan broke down after a few trials, and was abandoned.

It's appropriate here to describe one such trial — the Kady case, detailed reports of which the Ivanovo
provincial newspapers published initially.

At the end of 1934, a new local administrative district was created in the remote wilds of Ivanovo
Province at the point where it joined Kostroma and Nizhni Novgorod Provinces, and its center was
situated in the ancient, slow-moving village of Kady. New leaders were sent there from various
localities, and they made one another's acquaintance right in Kady. There they found a remote, sad,
impoverished region, badly in need of money, machines, and intelligent economic management, but,
instead, starved by grain procurements. It happened that Fyodor Ivanovich Smirnov, the First
Secretary of the District Party Committee, was a man with a strong sense of justice; Stavrov, the
head of the District Agricultural Department, was a peasant through and through, one of those
peasants known as the intensivniki — in other words, the hard-working, zealous, and literate peasants
who in the twenties had run their farms on a scientific basis, for which they were at that time
rewarded by the Soviet government, since it had not yet been decided that all these intensivniki must
be de- stroyed. Because Stavrov had entered the Party he had survived the liquidation of the kulaks.
(And maybe he even took part in the liquidation of the kulaks?) These men tried to do something for
the peasants in their new district, but directives kept pouring down from above and each one ran
counter to some initiative of theirs; it was as if, up there, they were busy thinking up what they could
do to make things worse and more desperate for the peasants. And at one point the leaders in Kady
wrote the province leadership that it was necessary to lower the plan for procurement of breadgrains
because the district couldn't fulfill the plan without becoming impoverished well below the danger
point. One has to recall the situation in the thirties (and maybe not only the thirties?) to realize what
sacrilege against the plan and what rebellion against the government this represented! But, in ac-
cordance with then current style, measures were not taken directly from above, but were left to local
initiative.

When Smirnov was on vacation, his deputy, Vasily Fyodorovich Romanov, the Sec- ond Secretary,
arranged to have a resolution passed by the District Party Committee: "The successes of the district
would have been even more brilliant [?] if it were not for the Trotskyite Stavrov." This set in motion
the "individual case" of Stavrov. (An interest- ing approach: Divide and rule! For the time being,
Smirnov was merely to be frightened, neutralized, and compelled to retreat; there would be time
enough later on to get to him. And this, on a small scale, was precisely the Stalinist tactic in the
Central Com- mittee.) At stormy Party meetings, however, it became clear that Stavrov was about as
much of a Trotskyite as he was a Jesuit. The head of the District Consumer Cooperatives, Vasily



Grigoryevich Vlasov, a man with a ragtag, haphazard education but one of those native talents others
are so surprised to find among Russians, a bom retail trade executive, eloquent, adroit in an
argument, who could get fired to red heat about anything he believed to be right, tried to persuade
the Party meeting to expel Romanov from the Party for slander. And they actually did give Romanov
an official Party rebuke! Romanov's last words in this dispute were typical of this kind of person,
demonstrating his assurance in regard to the general situation: "Even though they proved Stavrov
was not a Trotskyite, nonetheless I am sure he is a Trotskyite. The Party will investigate, and it will
also investigate the rebuke to me." And the Party did investigate: the District NKVD arrested
Stavrov almost immediately, and one month later they also arrested Univer, the Chairman of the
District Executive Com- mittee and an Estonian. And Romanov took over Univer's job as Chairman
of the District Executive Committee. Stavrov was taken to the Provincial NKVD, where he
confessed he was a Trotskyite, that he had acted in coalition with the SR's all his life, that he was a
member of an underground rightist organization in his district (this is a bouquet worthy of the times,
the only thing missing being a connection with the Entente). Perhaps he never really did confess
these things, but no one is ever going to know, since he died from torture during interrogation in the
internal prison of the Ivanovo NKVD. The pages of his deposition were there in full. Soon afterward,
they arrested Smirnov, the secretary of the District Party Committee, as the head of the supposed
rightist organization; and Saburov, the head of the District Fi- nancial Department, and someone else
as well.

Of interest is the way in which Vlasov's fate was decided. He had only recently demanded the
expulsion from the Party of Romanov, now the new Chairman of the District Executive Com- mittee.
He had also fatally offended Rusov, the district prosecutor, as we have already reported in Chapter 4,
above. He had offended N. I. Krylov, the Chairman of the District NKVD, by protecting two of his
energetic and resourceful executives from being ar- rested for supposed wrecking — both of them had
black marks on their records because of their social origins. (Vlasov always hired all kinds of
"former" people for his work — because they mastered the business effectively and, in addition, tried
hard; people pro- moted from the ranks of the proletariat knew nothing and, more importantly, didn't
want to know anything.) Nonetheless the NKVD was prepared to make its peace with the trade
cooperative! Sorokin, the Deputy Chairman of the District NKVD, came in person to see Vlasov
with a peace proposal: to give the NKVD 700 rubles' worth of materials without charging them for it
(and later on we will somehow write it off). (The ragpickers! And that was two months' wages for
Vlasov, who had never taken anything illegally for himself. ) "And if you don't give it to us, you are
going to regret it." Vlasov kicked him out: "How do you dare offer me, a Communist, a deal like
that?" The very next day Krylov paid a call on the District Consumer Cooperative, this time as the
rep- resentative of the District Committee of the Party. (This mas- querade, like all these tricks, was
in the spirit of 1937.) And this time he ordered the convening of a Party meeting; the agenda: "On
the wrecking activities of Smirnov and Univer in the Con- sumers' Cooperatives," the report to be
delivered by Comrade Vlasov. Well, now, that's a gem of a trick for you! No one at that point was
making charges against Vlasov. But it would be quite enough for him to say two little words about
the wrecking ac- tivities of the former secretary of the District Party Committee in his, Vlasov's,
field, and the NKVD would interrupt: "And where were you? Why didn't you come to us in time?"
In a situa- tion of this sort many others would have lost their heads and allowed themselves to be
trapped. But not Vlasov! He immedi- ately replied: "I won't make the report! Let Krylov make the
report — after all, he arrested Smirnov and Univer and is handling their case." Krylov refused: "I'm
not familiar with the evidence." Vlasov replied: "If even you aren't familiar with the evidence, that
means they were arrested without cause." So the Party meeting simply didn't take place. But how
often did people dare to defend themselves? (We will not have a complete picture of the atmosphere
of 1937 if we lose sight of the fact that there were still strong-willed people capable of difficult
decisions, and if we fail to recall that late that night T., the senior bookkeeper of the District
Consumer Cooperative, and his deputy N. came to Vlasov's office with 10,000 rubles: "Vasily
Grigoryevich! Get out of town tonight! Don't wait for tomorrow. Otherwise you are finished!" But
Vlasov thought it did not befit a Communist to run away. ) The next morning there was a nasty
article in the district paper on the work of the District Consumer Cooperative. (One has to point out
that in 1937 the press always played hand in glove with the NKVD.) By evening Vlasov had been



asked to give the District Party Committee an accounting of his own work. (Every step of the way,
this was how things were in the entire Soviet Union. )

This was 1937, the second year of the so-called "Mikoyan prosperity" in Moscow and other big
cities. And even today, in the reminiscences of journalists and writers, one gets the impres- sion that
at the time there was already plenty of everything. This concept seems to have gone down in history,
and there is a danger of its staying there. And yet, in November, 1936, two years after the abolition
of bread rationing, a secret directive was published in Ivanovo Province (and in other provinces)
prohibiting the sale of flour. In those years many housewives in small towns, and particularly in
villages, still used to bake their own bread. Pro- hibiting the sale of flour meant: Do not eat bread! In
the district center of Kady, long bread lines formed such as had never before been seen. (However,
they attacked that problem, too, by for- bidding the baking of black bread in district centers,
permitting only expensive white bread to be baked.) The only bakery in the whole Kady District was
the one in the district center, and people began to pour into the center from the villages to get black
bread. The warehouses of the District Consumer Cooperative had flour, but the two parallel
prohibitions blocked off all avenues by which it could be made available to the public! Vlasov,
however, man- aged to find a way out of the impasse, and despite the clever gov- emment rulings he
kept the district fed for a whole year: he went out to the collective farms and got eight of them to
agree to set up public bakeries in empty "kulak" huts (in other words, they would simply bring in
firewood and set the women to baking in ordinary Russian peasant ovens, but, mind you, ovens
which were now socialized, publicly not privately owned). The District Con- sumer Cooperative
would undertake to supply them with flour. There is eternal simplicity to a solution once it has been
dis- covered! Without building any bakeries (for which he had no funds), Vlasov set them up in one
day. Without carrying on a trade in flour, he released flour from the warehouse continuously and
proceeded to order more from the provincial center. Without selling black bread in the district center,
he gave the district black bread. Yes, he did not violate the letter of the instructions, but he violated
their spirit — for their essence was to compel a reduc- tion in flour consumption by starving the
people. And so, of course, there were good grounds for criticizing him at the Dis- trict Party
Committee.

After that criticism he remained free overnight and was ar- rested the next morning. He was a tough
little bantam rooster. He was short, and he always carried his head slightly thrown back, with a touch
of aggressiveness. He tried to avoid surrendering his Party membership card, because no decision
expelling him from the Party had been reached at the District Party Committee the night before. He
also refused to give up his identification card as a deputy of the district soviet, since he had been
elected by the people, and the District Executive Committee had not taken any decision depriving
him of his deputy's immunity. But the police did not appreciate such formalities and overpowered
him, and took them away by main force. They took him from the District Consumer Cooperative
down the main street of Kady in broad daylight, and his young merchandise manager, a Komsomol
mem- ber, saw him from the window of the District Party Committee headquarters. At that time not
everyone, especially in the villages, because of their naivete, had learned to keep quiet about what
they thought. The merchandise manager shouted: "Look at those bastards! Now they've taken away
my boss too!" Right then and there, without leaving the room, they expelled him from both the
District Party Committee and from the Komsomol, and he slid down the well-known pathway into
the bottomless pit.

Vlasov was arrested very late in comparison with the others who were charged in the same case. The
case had been nearly completed without him, and it was in process of being set up as an open trial.
They took him to the Ivanovo NKVD Internal Prison, but, since he was the last to be involved, he
was not sub- jected to any heavy pressure. He was interrogated twice. There was no supporting
testimony from witnesses. And the file of his interrogation was filled with summary reports of the
District Con- sumer Cooperative and clips from the district newspaper. Vlasov was charged with: (1)
initiating bread lines; (2) having an in- adequate minimum assortment of merchandise (just as though
the unavailable merchandise existed somewhere else and someone had offered it to Kady) ; (3)



procuring a surplus of salt (but this was the obligatory "mobilization" reserve: ever since ancient
times people in Russia have been afraid of being without salt in the event of war).

At the end of September, the defendants were brought to Kady for public trial. It was not a short trip.
(Remember how cheap the OSO's and the closed courts were!) From Ivanovo to Ki- neshma they
went in a Stolypin railway car; then seventy miles from Kineshma to Kady in automobiles. There
were more than ten cars, an unusual file along an old, deserted road, and one that aroused
astonishment, fear, and the expectation of war in the villages. Klyugin, the Chief of the Special
Secret Department of the Provincial NKVD for Counter- Revolutionary Organiza- tions, was
responsible for the faultless organization of the whole trial and for terrifying the public with it. Their
convoy consisted of forty guards from the reserves of the mounted police, and every day from
September 24 to 27, with swords unsheathed and Naguan revolvers at the ready, they took the
prisoners from the District NKVD to the still unfinished club building and back, through the village
where they had until recently been the gov- ernment. Windows had already been installed in the
club, but the stage had not yet been finished. There was no electricity. There was no electricity in
Kady at all. After nightfall the court met by the light of kerosene lamps. The spectators were brought
in from the collective farms in rotation. And all Kady crowded in as well. Not only did they sit on
window sills and benches, but they stood packed in the aisles, seven hundred of them at a time.
(Russians have always loved spectacles.) The forward benches were regularly reserved for
Communists to provide the court with dependable support.

A Special Assize of the provincial court had been constituted, consisting of Deputy Chairman of the
Provincial Court Shubin, who presided, and members Biche and Zaozerov. The provincial
prosecutor Karasik, a graduate of Dorpat University, was in charge of the prosecution. And even
though all the accused de- clined defense lawyers, a government lawyer was forced on them so that
the case wouldn't be left without a prosecutor. The formal indictment, solemn, menacing, and
lengthy, came down in essence to the charge that an underground Rightist Bukharinite group had
existed in Kady District, which had been formed in Ivanovo (in other words, you could expect arrests
in Ivanovo too), and had as its purpose the overthrow by wrecking of the Soviet gov- ernment in the
village of Kady (and this was about the remotest boondock in all Russia the rightists could have
found for a starting point! ).

The prosecutor petitioned the court to have Stavrov's testi- mony, given before his death in prison,
read to the court and accepted as evidence. In fact, the whole charge against the group was based on
Stavrov's evidence. The court agreed to include the testimony of the deceased, just as if he were
alive. (With the advantage, however, that none of the defendants could refute it.)

But darkest Kady did not appreciate these scholarly fine points. It waited to see what came next. The
testimony of Stavrov, who had been killed under interrogation, was read to the court and once again
became part of the record. The questioning of the defendants began — and immediately there was
chaos. All of them repudiated the testimony they had given during the interrogation.

It is not clear how, in such an event, things would have been arranged in the October Hall of the
House of the Unions in Mos- cow — but here, at any rate, it was decided shamelessly to continue. The
judge rebuked the defendants: How could you have given different testimony during the
interrogation? Univer, very weak, replied in a barely audible voice: "As a Communist I cannot, in a
public trial, describe the interrogation methods of the NKVD." (Now there was a model for the
Bukharin trial! Now that's what keeps them together! More than anything else, . they are worried that
people might think ill of the Party. Their judges had long since stopped worrying about that.)

During the recess, Klyugin visited the cells of the defendants. He said to Vlasov: "You've heard how
Smimov and Univer played the whore, the bastards? You've got to admit your guilt and tell the
whole truth!" "The truth and nothing but the truth," willingly agreed Vlasov, who had not yet
weakened. "The truth and nothing but the truth that you are every bit as bad as the German Fascists!"



Klyugin flew into a rage: "Listen here, you whore, you'll pay with your blood!"

[Your own blood, too, is going to flow soon, Klyugin! Caught in the Yezhov gang of gaybisty,
Klyugin will have his throat cut by the stool pigeon Gubaidulin.]

From that moment Vlasov was pushed forward from a back seat among the defendants to a leading
role in the trial — as the ideological leader of the group.

The crowd jamming the aisles grew interested whenever the court fearlessly broke into questions
about bread lines — about things that touched everyone present to the quick. (And, of course, bread
had been put on unrestricted sale just before the trial, and there were no bread lines that day.) A
question to the accused Smimov: "Did you know about the bread lines in the district?" "Yes, of
course. They stretched from the store itself right up to the building of the District Party Committee."
"And what did you do about them?" Notwithstanding the tortures he had endured, Smirnov had
preserved his resounding voice and tranquil righteousness. This broad-shouldered man with a simple
face and light-brown hair answered slowly, and the whole hall heard every word he said: "Since all
appeals to organizations in the provincial capital had failed, I instructed Vlasov to write a report to
Comrade Stalin." "And why didn't you write it?" (They hadn't yet known about it! They had certainly
missed that one!) "We did write it, and I sent it by courier directly to the Central Committee,
bypassing the provincial leaders. A copy was kept in the District Committee files."

The whole courtroom held its breath. The court itself was in a commotion. They shouldn't have
continued questioning, but nonetheless someone asked: "And what happened?"

And, indeed, that question was on the lips of everyone in the courtroom: "What happened?"

Smimov did not sob, did not groan over the death of his ideal (and that's what was missing in the
Moscow trials!). He replied loudly and calmly:

"Nothing. There was no answer. "

And his tired voice seemed to say: Well, that, in fact, was just what I expected.

There was no answer. From the Father and Teacher there was no answer! The public trial had
already reached its zenith! It had already shown the masses the black heart of the Cannibal! And the
trial could have been called off right then and there. But, oh no, they didn't have sense enough for
that, or tact enough for that, and they kept rubbing away at the befouled spot for three more days.

The prosecutor raised a hue and cry: Double-dealing! That's what it was. They engaged in wrecking
with one hand and with the other they dared write Comrade Stalin. And they even ex- pected a reply
from him. Let the defendant Vlasov tell us how he pulled off such a nightmarish piece of wrecking
that he stopped the sale of flour and the baking of rye bread in the district center.

Vlasov, the bantam rooster, didn't have to be asked to rise — he had already jumped up, and he
shouted resoundingly through the hall:

"I agree to give a full answer to the court, but on condition that you, the prosecutor, Karasik, leave
the accuser's rostrum and sit down here next to me!" It was incomprehensible. Noise, shout- ing. Call
them to order! What was going on?

Having gotten the floor with this maneuver, Vlasov explained willingly.

"The prohibitions on selling flour and baking rye bread were instituted by a decree of the Provincial
Executive Committee. One of the permanent members of its presidium is Provincial Prose- cutor



Karasik. If that's wrecking, then why didn't you veto it as prosecutor? That means you were a
wrecker even before I was!"

The prosecutor choked. It was a swift, well-placed blow. The court was also at a loss. The judge
mumbled.

"If necessary [?] we will try the prosecutor too. But today we are trying you."
(Two truths: it all depends on your rank.)

"I demand that he be removed from the prosecutor's rostrum," insisted the indefatigable, irrepressible
Vlasov.

Recess.

Now, in terms of indoctrinating the masses, just what sig- nificance could such a trial have?

But they kept on and on. After questioning the defendants they began to question the witnesses. The
bookkeeper N.

"What do you know about Vlasov's wrecking activities?"

"Nothing."

"How can that be?"

"I was in the witnesses' room and I didn't hear what was said in here."

"You don't have to hear! Many documents passed through your hands. You couldn't help but know."
"The documents were all in proper order."

"But here is a stack of district newspapers, and even there they were writing about Vlasov's wrecking
activities. And you claim you don't know anything?"

"Well, go ask the people who wrote the articles."

Then there was the manager of the bread store.

"Tell me, does the Soviet government have much bread?"

(Well, now! Just how could you answer that? Who was going to say: "I didn't count it"?)
"A lot."

"Why are there bread lines at your store?"
"I don't know."
"Who was in charge?"
"I don't know."



"What do you mean, you don't know? Who was in charge of your store?"
"Vasily Grigoryevich."

"What the devil! What do you mean calling him Vasily Gri- goryevich? Defendant Vlasov! That
means he was in charge."

The witness fell silent.

The judge of the court dictated to the stenographer: "The answer: 'As a consequence of the wrecking
activity of Vlasov, bread lines resulted, notwithstanding the Soviet government's enormous stocks of
bread.' "

Repressing his own fears, the prosecutor delivered a long and angry speech. The defense lawyer for
the most part defended only himself, emphasizing that the interests of the Motherland were as dear to
him as they were to any honest citizen.

In his final words to the court, Smirnov asked for nothing and expressed no repentance for anything.
Insofar as we can recon- struct it now, he was a firm person and too forthright to have lasted through
1937.

When Saburov begged that his life be spared — "not for me, but for my little children" — Vlasov, out
of vexation, pulled him back by the jacket: "You're a fool."

Vlasov himself did not fail to take advantage of his last chance to talk back impudently.

"I consider you not a court but actors pretending to be a court in a stage farce where roles have
already been written for you. You are engaged in a repulsive provocation on the part of the NKVD.
You are going to sentence me to be shot no matter what I say. I believe one thing only: the time will
come when you will be here in my place."

[Generally speaking, he was wrong just on this one point.]

The court spent from 7 P.M. to 1 A.M. composing the verdict, and all the while the kerosene lamps
were burning in the hall, and the defendants sat beneath drawn sabers, and there was a hum of
conversation among the spectators who had not left.

And just as it took them a long time to compose the verdict, it took them a long time to read it, piling
up on top of one an- other all kinds of fantastic wrecking activities, contacts, and plans. Smirnov,
Univer, Saburov, and Vlasov were sentenced to be shot; two others to ten years; one to eight years.
In addition, the verdict of the court led to the exposure of an additional wrecking organi- zation in
the Komsomol in Kady (whose members were, of course, immediately arrested. Remember the
young merchandise man- ager?). And of a center of underground organizations in Ivanovo, which
was, of course, in its turn, subordinate to Moscow. (One more nail in Bukharin's coffin.)

After the solemn words "To be shot!" the judges paused for applause. But the mood in the hall was
so gloomy, with the sighs and tears of people who had no connection with the defendants, and the
screams and swooning of their relatives, that no applause was to be heard even from the first two
benches, where the Party members were sitting. This, indeed, was totally improper. "Oh, good Lord,
what have you done?" someone in the hall shouted at the members of the court. Univer's wife
dissolved in tears. In the half-darkness, the crowd began to stir. Vlasov shouted at the front benches:

"Come on, you bastards, why aren't you clapping? Some Communists you are!"



The political commissar of the guards platoon ran up to him and shoved his revolver in his face.
Vlasov reached out to grab the revolver, but a policeman ran up and pushed back his political
commissar, who had been guilty of a blunder. The chief of the convoy gave the command: "Arms at
the ready!" And thirty police carbines and the pistols of the local NKVD men were aimed at the
defendants and at the crowd. (It seemed at the time as though the crowd would rush forward to free
the defendants.)

The hall was lit only by a few kerosene lamps, and the semi -darkness heightened the general
confusion and fear. The crowd, finally convinced, not so much by the trial as by the carbines now
leveled at it, pushed in a panic against the doors and windows. The wood cracked and broke; glass
tinkled. Univer's wife, in a dead faint, was almost trampled to death and was left lying beneath the
chairs until morning.

And there never was any applause.

[One little note on eight-year-old Zoya Vlasova. She loved her father intensely. She could no longer

go to school. (They teased her: "Your papa is a wrecker!" She would get in a fight: "My papa is
good!") She lived only one year after the trial. Up to then she had never been ill. During that year she
did not once smile; she went about with head hung low, and the old women prophesied: "She keeps
looking at the earth; she is going to die soon." She died of inflammation of the brain, and as she was
dying she kept calling out: "Where is my papa? Give me my papa!" When we count up the millions
of those who perished in the camps, we forget to multiply them by two, by three.]

And not only couldn't the condemned prisoners be shot then and there, but they had to be kept under
even stricter guard, because now they really had nothing at all to lose, and they had to be taken to the
provincial capital for execution.

They managed to cope with the first problem — sending them off by night to the NKVD along the

main street — by having each condemned man guarded by five men. One of the guards carried a
lantern. One went ahead with a pistol at the ready. Two held the condemned prisoner by the arms
and kept their pistols in their free hands. The fifth brought up the rear, with his pistol pointed at the
condemned man's back.

The rest of the police were ranged in formation in order to prevent any attack by the crowd.

Every reasonable man will now agree that the NKVD could never have carried out its great
assignment if they had fussed about with open trials.

And that is why public political trials never really put down roots in our country.

Chapter 11

The Supreme Measure

Capital punishment has had an up-and-down history in Russia. In the Code of the Tsar Aleksei
Mikhailovich Romanov there were fifty crimes for which capital punishment could be imposed. By
the time of the Military Statutes of Peter the Great there were two hundred. Yet the Empress
Elizabeth, while she did not repeal those laws authorizing capital punishment, never once resorted to
it. They say that when she ascended the throne she swore an oath never to execute anyone — and for
all twenty years of her reign she kept that oath. She fought the Seven Years' War! Yet she still got
along without capital punishment. It was an astound- ing record in the mid-eighteenth century — fifty
years before the guillotine of the Jacobins. True, we have taught ourselves to ridicule all our past; we
never acknowledge a good deed or a good intention in our history. And one can very easily blacken
Eliza- beth's reputation too; she replaced capital punishment with flog- ging with the knout; tearing



out nostrils; branding with the word "thief; and eternal exile in Siberia. But let us also say something
on behalf of the Empress: how could she have changed things more radically than she did in
contravention of the social concepts of her time? And perhaps the prisoner condemned to death
today would voluntarily consent to that whole complex of punishments if only the sun would
continue to shine on him; but we, in our humanitarianism, don't offer him that chance. And perhaps
the reader will come to feel in the course of this book that twenty or even ten years in our camps are
harder to bear than were the punishments of Elizabeth?

In today's terms, Elizabeth had a universally human point of view on all this, while the Empress
Catherine the Great had, on the contrary, a class point of view (which was consequently more
correct). Not to execute anyone at all seemed to her appalling and indefensible. She found capital
punishment entirely appropriate to defending herself, her throne, and her system — in other words, in
political cases, such as those of Mirovich, the Moscow plague mutiny, and Pugachev. But for
habitual criminals, for nonpolitical offenders, why not consider capital punishment abolished?

Under Paul, the abolition of capital punishment was confirmed. (Despite his many wars, there were
no military tribunals attached to military units.) And during the whole long reign of Alex- ander I,
capital punishment was introduced only for war crimes that took place during a campaign (1812).
(Right at this point, some people will say to us: What about deaths from running the gantlet? Yes,
indeed, there were, of course, hidden executions — for that matter, one can literally drive a person to
death with a trade-union meeting! ) But the yielding up of one's God-given life because others,
sitting in judgment, have so voted simply did not take place in our country even for crimes of state
for an entire half-century — from Pugachev to the Decembrists.

The blood of the five Decembrists whetted the appetite of our state. From then on, execution for
crimes of state was no longer prohibited nor was it forgotten, right up to the February Revolu- tion in
1917. It was confirmed by the Statutes of 1845 and 1904, and further reinforced by the criminal
statutes of the army and navy.

And how many people were executed in Russia during that period? We have already, in Chapter 8
above, cited the figures given by liberal leaders of 1905-1907. Let us add to them the verified figures
of N. S. Tagantsev, the expert on Russian criminal law.

[ N. S. Tagantsev, Smertnaya Kazn ( Capital Punishment), St. Petersburg, 1913.]

Up until 1905, the death penalty was an exceptional measure in Russia. For a period of thirty years —
from 1876 to 1904 (the period of the Narodnaya Volya revolutionaries and the use of terrorism — a
terrorism which did not consist merely of intentions murmured in the kitchen of a communal
apartment — a period of mass strikes and peasant revolts; the period when the parties of the future
revolution were created and grew in strength) — 486 people were executed; in other words, about
seventeen people per year for the whole country. (This figure includes executions of ordinary,
nonpolitical criminals!)

[Thirteen people were executed in Schliisselburg from 1884 to 1906. An awesome total — for
Switzerland perhaps!]

During the years of the first revolution (1905) and its suppression, the number of executions rocketed
upward, astounding Russian imaginations, calling forth tears from Tolstoi and indignation from
Korolenko and many, many others: from 1905 through 1908 about 2,200 persons were executed —
forty-five a month. This, as Tagantsev said, was an epidemic of executions. It came to an abrupt end.

When the Provisional Government came to power, it abolished capital punishment entirely. In July,

1917, however, it was re- instated in the active army and front-line areas for military crimes, murder,
rape, assault, and pillage (very widespread in those areas at that time). This was one of the most



unpopular of the measures which destroyed the Provisional Government. The Bolsheviks' slogan
before the Bolshevik coup d'etat was: "Down with capital punishment, reinstated by Kerensky!"

A story has come down to us that on the night of October 25-26 a discussion arose in Smolny as to
whether one of the first decrees shouldn't be the abolition of capital punishment in perpetuity —
whereupon Lenin justly ridiculed the idealism of his comrades. He, at any rate, knew that without
capital punishment there would be no movement whatever in the direction of the new society.
However, in forming a coalition government with the Left SR's, he gave in to their faulty concepts,
and on October 28, 1917, capital punishment was abolished. Nothing good, of course, could come
from that "goody-goody" position. (Yes, and how did they get rid of it? At the beginning of 1918,
Trotsky ordered that Aleksei Shchastny, a newly appointed admiral, be brought to trial because he
had refused to scuttle the Baltic Fleet. Karklin, the Chairman of the Verkhtrib, quickly sentenced him
in broken Russian: "To be shot within twenty-four hours." There was a stir in the hall: But it has
been abolished! Prosecutor Krylenko explained: "What are you worrying about? Executions have
been abolished. But Shchastny is not being executed; he is being shot." And they did shoot him.)

If we are to judge by official documents, capital punishment was restored in all its force in June,
1918. No, it was not "re- stored"; instead, a new era of executions was inaugurated. If one takes the
view that Latsis is not deliberately understating the real figures but simply lacks complete
information, and that the Revtribunals carried on approximately the same amount of judicial work as
the Cheka performed in an extrajudicial way, one concludes that in the twenty central provinces of
Russia in a period of sixteen months (June, 1918, to October, 1919) more than sixteen thousand
persons were shot, which is to say more than one thousand a month.

[Now that we have started to make comparisons, here is another: during the eighty years of the
Inquisition's peak effort (1420 to 1498), in all of Spain ten thousand persons were condemned to be
burned to death at the stake — ^in other words, about ten a month.]

(This, incidentally, is when they shot both Khrustalev-Nosar, the Chairman of the 1905 St. Peters-
burg Soviet — the first Russian soviet — and the artist who designed the legendary uniform worn by
the Red Army throughout the Civil War.)

However, it may not even have been these individual execu- tions, with or without formally
pronounced death sentences, which added up to thousands and inaugurated the new era of executions
in 1918 that stunned and froze Russia. Still more terrible to us was the practice — initially followed
by both warring sides and, later, by the victors only — of sinking barges loaded with uncounted,
unregistered hundreds, unidentified even by a roll call. (Naval officers in the Gulf of Finland, in the
White, Caspian, and Black seas, and, as late as 1920, hostages in Lake Baikal. ) This is outside the
scope of our narrow history of courts and trials, but it belongs to the history of morals, which is
where everything else originates as well. In all our centuries, from the first Ryurik on, had there ever
been a period of such cruelties and so much killing as during the post-October Civil War?

We would omit from view one of the characteristic ups-and- downs of the Russian capital-
punishment story if we neglected to mention that capital punishment was abolished in January, 1920.
Yes, indeed! And some students of the subject might con- ceivably be at a loss to interpret the
credulity and helplessness of a dictatorship that deprived itself of its avenging sword when Denikin
was still in the Kuban, Wrangel still in the Crimea, and the Polish cavalry were saddling up for a
campaign. But, in the first place, this decree was quite sensible: it did not extend to the decisions of
military tribunals, but applied only to extrajudicial actions of the Cheka and the decisions of
tribunals in the rear. In the second place, the way was prepared for it by first cleaning out the
prisons by the wholesale execution of prisoners who might otherwise have come "under the decree."
And, in the third place, it was in effect for a brief period — four months. (It lasted only until the
prisons had filled up again.) By a decree of May 28, 1920, capital punishment was restored to the
Cheka.



The Revolution had hastened to rename everything, so that everything would seem new. Thus the
death penalty was re- christened "the supreme measure" — no longer a "punishment" but a means of
social defense. From the groundwork of the criminal legislation of 1924 it is clear that the supreme
measure was introduced only temporarily, pending its total abolition by the All-Russian Central
Executive Committee.

And in 1927 they actually did begin to abolish it. It was re- tained solely for crimes against the state
and the army — Article 58 and military crimes — and, true, for banditry also. (But the broad political
interpretation of "banditry" was as well known then as it is now: from a Central Asian "Basmach,"
right up to a Lithuanian forest guerrilla, every armed nationalist who doesn't agree with the central
government is a "bandit," and how could one possibly get along without that article? Similarly, any
par- ticipant in a camp rebellion and any participant in an urban rebellion is also a "bandit.") But
where articles protecting private individuals were concerned, capital punishment was abolished to
commemorate the tenth anniversary of the Revolu- tion.

And for the fifteenth anniversary, the law of Seven-eighths was added to the roster of capital
punishment — that law so vitally important to advancing socialism, which guaranteed the Soviet
subject a bullet for each crumb stolen from the state's table.

As always happens at the start, they hurried to apply this law in 1932-1933 and shot people with

special ferocity. In this time of peace in December, 1932 (while Kirov was still alive), at one time
265 condemned prisoners were awaiting execution in Leningrad's Kresty Prison alone.

[Testimony of B., who brought food to the cells of the prisoners con- demned to be shot.]

And during the whole year, it would certainly seem that more than a thousand were shot in Kresty
alone.

And what kind of evildoers were these condemned men? Where did so many plotters and
troublemakers come from? Among them, for example, were six collective farmers from nearby
Tsarskoye Selo who were guilty of the following crime: After they had finished mowing the
collective farm with their own hands, they had gone back and mowed a second time along the
hummocks to get a little hay for their own cows. The Ail- Russian Central Executive Committee
refused to pardon all six of these peasants, and the sentence of execution was carried out.

What cruel and evil Saltychikha, what utterly repulsive and infamous serf-owner would have killed
six peasants for their miserable little clippings of hay? If one had dared to beat them with birch
switches even once, we would know about it and read about it in school and curse that name.

[What isn't known in our schools is the fact that Saltychikha, by a verdict of her own peers, was
imprisoned for eleven years in the subterranean crypt of the Ivanovsky Monastery in Moscow for the
atrocities inflicted on her serfs. (Prugavin, Monastyrskiye Tyurmy [Monastery Prisons], Posrednik
Publishers, p. 39.)]

But now, heave the corpses into the water, and pretty soon the surface is all smooth again and no
one's the wiser. And one must cherish the hope that someday documents will confirm the report of
my witness, who is still alive. Even if Stalin had killed no others, I believe he deserved to be drawn
and quartered just for the lives of those six Tsarskoye Selo peasants! And yet they still dare shriek at
us (from Peking, from Tirana, from Tbilisi, yes, and plenty of big-bellies in the Moscow suburbs are
doing it too): "How could you dare expose him?" "How could you dare disturb his great shade?"
"Stalin belongs to the world Communist move- ment!" But in my opinion all he belongs to is the
Criminal Code. "The peoples of all the world remember him as a friend." But not those on whose
backs he rode, whom he slashed with his knout.



However, let us return to being dispassionate and impartial once more. Of course, the All-Russian
Central Executive Com- mittee would certainly have "completely abolished" the supreme measure,
as promised, but unfortunately what happened was that in 1936 the Father and Teacher "completely
abolished" the All-Russian Central Executive Committee itself. And the Supreme Soviet that
succeeded it had an eighteenth-century ring. "The supreme measure" became a punishment once
again, and ceased to be some kind of incomprehensible "social defense." Even to the StaUnist ear the
executions of 1937-1938 could hardly fit into any framework of "defense."

What legal expert, what criminal historian, will provide us with verified statistics for those 1937-
1938 executions? Where is that Special Archive we might be able to penetrate in order to read the
figures? There is none. There is none and there never will be any. Therefore we dare report only
those figures mentioned in rumors that were quite fresh in 1939-1940, when they were drifting
around under the Butyrki arches, having emanated from the high- and middle-ranking Yezhov men
of the NKVD who had been arrested and had passed through those cells not long before. (And they
really knew!) The Yezhov men said that dur- ing those two years of 1937 and 1938 a half-million
"political prisoners" had been shot throughout the Soviet Union, and 480,- 000 blatnye — habitual
thieves — in addition. (The thieves were all shot under Article 59-3 because they constituted "a basis
of Yagoda's power"; and thereby the "ancient and noble companion- ship of thieves" was pruned
back. )

How improbable are these figures? Taking into consideration that the mass executions went on not
for two full years but only for a year and a half, we would have to assume (under Article 58 — in
other words, the politicals alone) an average of 28,000 executions per month in that period. For the
whole Soviet Union. But at how many different locations were executions being carried out? A
figure of 150 would be very modest. (There were more, of course. In Pskov alone, the NKVD set up
torture and execution chambers in the basements of many churches, in former hermits' cells. And
even in 1953 tourists were still not allowed into these churches, on the grounds that "archives" were
kept there. The cobwebs hadn't been swept out for ten years at a stretch: those were the "archives"
they kept there. And before beginning restoration work on these churches, they had to haul away the
bones in them by the truckload.) On the basis of this calculation, an average of six people were shot
in the course of one day at each execution site. What's so fantastic about that? It is even an
understatement! (According to other sources, 1,700,000 had been shot by January 1, 1939.)

During the years of World War II, the use of capital punish- ment was occasionally extended for
various reasons (as, for example, by the militarization of the railroads), and, at times, was broadened
as to method (from April, 1943, on, for example, with the decree on hanging).

All these events delayed to a certain extent the promised full, final, and perpetual repeal of the death
penalty. However, the patience and loyalty of our people finally earned them this re- ward. In May,
1947, losif Vissarionovich inspected his new starched dickey in his mirror, liked it, and dictated to
the Presi- dium of the Supreme Soviet the Decree on the Abolition of Capital Punishment in
peacetime (replacing it with a new maximum term of twenty-five years — it was a good pretext for
introducing the so-called quarter).

But our people are ungrateful, criminal, and incapable of ap- predating generosity. Therefore, after
the rulers had creaked along and eked out two and a half years without the death penalty, on January
12, 1950, a new decree was published that constituted an about-face: "In view of petitions pouring in
from the national republics [the Ukraine?], from the trade unions [oh, those lovely trade unions; they
always know what's needed], from peasant organizations [this was dictated by a sleepwalker: the
Gracious Sovereign had stomped to death all peasant organi- zations way back in the Year of the
Great Turning Point], and also from cultural leaders [now, that is quite likely]," capital punishment
was restored for a conglomeration of "traitors of the Motherland, spies, and subversives-
diversionists." (And, of course, they forgot to repeal the quarter, the twenty-five-year sentence,
which remained in force.)



And once this return to our familiar friend, to our beheading blade, had begun, things went further
with no effort at all: in 1954, for premeditated murder; in May, 1961, for theft of state property, and
counterfeiting, and terrorism in places of imprison- ment (this was directed especially at prisoners
who killed in- formers and terrorized the camp administration); in July, 1961, for violating the rules
governing foreign currency transactions; in February, 1962, for threatening the lives of (shaking a
fist at) policemen or Communist vigilantes, the so-called "druzhinniki"; then for rape; and
immediately thereafter for bribery.

But all of this is simply temporary — until complete abolition. And that's how it's described today too.

["Osnovy Ugolovnogo Zakonodatelstva SSSR" ("Fundamental Principles of Criminal Legislation of
the U.S.S.R."), Article 22, in Vedomosti Ver- khovnogo Soveta SSSR (Bulletin of the Supreme Soviet
of the U.S.S.R.), 1959, No. 1.]

And so it turns out that Russia managed longest of all without capital punishment in the reign of the
Empress Elizabeth Petrovna.

In our happy, blind existence, we picture condemned men as a few ill-fated, solitary individuals. We
instinctively believe that we could never end up on death row, that it would take an out- standing
career if not heinous guilt for that to happen. A great deal has still to be shaken up inside our heads
for us to get the real picture: a mass of the most ordinary, average, gray people have languished in
death cells for the most ordinary, everyday misdemeanors, and, although some were lucky and had
their death sentences commuted, which was purely a matter of chance, they very often got the super
(which is what the prisoners called "the supreme measure," since they hate lofty words and manage
somehow to give everything a nickname that is both crude and short).

The agronomist of a District Agricultural Department got a death sentence for his mistaken analysis
of collective farm grain! (Maybe it was because his analysis wasn't what his chiefs wanted from
him?) That was in 1937.

Melnikov, the chairman of a handicraft artel that made spools for thread, was sentenced to death
because a spark from a steam engine in his artel had caused a fire! That was in 1937. (True, his death
sentence was commuted to a "tenner.")

In that same Kresty Prison in Leningrad, in 1932, two of the men in death cells were Feldman,
convicted of possessing foreign currency, and Faitelevich, a student at the conservatory, for having
sold steel ribbon for pen points. Primordial commerce, the bread and butter and pastime of the Jew,
had also become worthy of the death penalty.

Ought we to be surprised then that the Ivanovo Province village lad Geraska got the death penalty?

In honor of the spring St. Nicholas holiday, he went off to the next village to celebrate; he drank
heavily and, with a stick, he hit the rear end — no, not of the policeman himself, but of the
policeman's horse. (True, in a rage at the police he ripped a piece of board off the village soviet
building and then yanked out the village soviet telephone by the cord, shouting: "Smash the devils!")

Whether our destiny holds a death cell in store for us is not determined by what we have done or not
done. It is determined by the turn of a great wheel and the thrust of powerful external circumstances.
For example, Leningrad was under siege and blockade. And what would its highest-ranking leader.
Comrade Zhdanov, think if there were no executions among the cases in Leningrad State Security
during such difficult times? He would think the Organs were lying down on the job, would he not?
Were there not big underground plots, directed from outside by the Germans, to be discovered? Why
were such plots discovered under Stalin in 1919 and not under Zhdanov in 1942? No sooner ordered
than done. Several ramified plots were discovered. You were asleep in your unheated Leningrad
room, and the sharp claws of the black hand were already hovering over you. And yet none of this



depended on you. Notice was taken of a Lieutenant General Ignatovsky, whose windows looked out
on the Neva; he had pulled out a white handkerchief to blow his nose. Aha, a signal! Furthermore,
because Ignatovsky was an engineer, he liked to talk about machinery with the sailors. And that
clinched it! Ignatovsky was arrested. The time for reckoning came. Come on now, name forty
members of your organization. He named them. And so, if you happened to be an usher at the
Aleksandrinsky Theatre, your chances of being named as one of his particular forty were minimal.
But if you were a professor at the Technological Institute, there you were on that list (once more, that
accursed intelligentsia). So how could it depend on you? To be on such a list amounted to execution
for each one.

And so they shot all of them. But here is how Konstantin Ivanovich Strakhovich, a very important
Russian scientist in hydrodynamics, remained alive: Some even higher bigwigs in State Security
were dissatisfied because the list was too small and not enough people were being shot. Therefore
Strakhovich was selected as a suitable center for uncovering a new organization. He was summoned
by Captain AltshuUer: "What's this all about? Did you rush to confess everything so that you'd get
shot and thereby conceal the underground government? What was your role in it?" Thus Strakhovich
found himself in a new round of interrogations while he remained on death row. He proposed that
they consider him the underground Minister of Education. (He wanted to get it over with as soon as
possible!) But that wasn't good enough for AltshuUer. The interrogation continued, and by this time
Ignatovsky's group was being executed. During one of the interrogation sessions Strakhovich got
angry. It wasn't that he wanted to live but that he was tired of dying, and, more than anything else,
the lies made him sick. And so while he was being cross-questioned in the presence of some Security
police bigwig, he pounded on the table: "You are the ones who ought to be shot. I am not going to lie
any longer. I take back all my testimony." And his outburst helped! Not only did they stop
interrogating him, but they forgot about him in his death cell for a long time.

In all probability an outburst of desperation in the midst of general submissiveness will always help.

Thus many were shot — thousands at first, then hundreds of thousands. We divide, we multiply, we
sigh, we curse. But still and all, these are just numbers. They overwhelm the mind and then are easily
forgotten. And if someday the relatives of those who had been shot were to send one publisher
photographs of their executed kin, and an album of those photographs were to be published in
several volumes, then just by leafing through them and looking into the extinguished eyes we would
learn much that would be valuable for the rest of our lives. Such read- ing, almost without words,
would leave a deep mark on our hearts for all eternity.

In one household I am familiar with, where some former zeks live, the following ceremony takes
place: On March 5, the day of the death of the Head Murderer, they spread out on the table all the
photographs of those who were shot and those who died in camps that they have been able to
collect — several dozen of them. And throughout the day solemnity reigns in the apartment —
somewhat like that of a church, somewhat like that of a museum. There is funeral music. Friends
come to visit, to look at the photographs, to keep silent, to listen, to talk softly together. And then
they leave without saying good-bye.

And that is how it ought to be everywhere. At least these deaths would have left a small scar on our
hearts.

So that they should not have died in vain!

And I, too, have a few such chance photographs. Look at these at least:
Viktor Petrovich Pokrovsky — shot in Moscow in 1918.
Aleksandr Shtrobinder, a student — shot in Petrograd in 1918.



Vasily Ivanovich Anichkov — shot in the Lubyanka in 1927.
Aleksandr Andreyevich Svechin, a professor of the General Staff — shot in 1935.
Mikhail Aleksandrovich Reformatsky, an agronomist — shot in Orel in 1938.
Yelizaveta Yevgenyevna Anichkova — shot in a camp on the Yenisei in 1942.

How does all that happen? What is it like for people to wait there? What do they feel? What do they

think about? And what decisions do they come to? And what is it like when they are taken away?
And what do they feel in their last moments? And how, actually, do they . . . well ... do they ... ?

The morbid desire to pierce that curtain is natural. (Even though it is, of course, never going to
happen to any of us.) And it is natural that those who have survived cannot tell us about the very
end — because, after all, they were pardoned.

What happens next is something the executioners know about. But the executioners are not about to
talk. (Take, for instance, that famous Uncle Lyosha in the Kresty Prison in Leningrad, who twisted
the prisoner's hands behind his back and put handcuffs on him, and then, if the prisoner shouted
down the nighttime corridor, "Farewell, brothers!" crammed a roUed-up rag into his mouth — just
why should he tell you about it? He is probably still walking around Leningrad, well dressed. But if
you happen to run into him in a beer parlor on the islands or at a soccer game, ask him!)

However, even the executioner doesn't know about everything right to the very end. While a motor

roars its accompaniment, he fires his pistol bullets, unheard, into the back of a head, and he is
himself stupidly condemned not to understand what he has done. He doesn't know about the very
end! Only those who have been killed know it all to the very end — and that means no one.

It's true, however, that the artist, however obliquely and un- clearly, nevertheless knows some part of
what happens right up to the actual bullet, the actual noose.

So we are going to construct — from artists and from those who were pardoned — an approximate
picture of the death cell. We know, for example, that they do not sleep at night but lie there waiting.
That they calm down again only in the morning.

Narokov (Marchenko) in his novel. Imaginary Values, a work much spoiled by the author's self-
assigned task of describ- ing everything as though he were Dostoyevsky, of tearing at the reader's
heartstrings and trying to move him even more than Dostoyevsky, nevertheless in my opinion
described the death cell and the scene of the execution itself very well. One cannot verify it, of
course, but somehow one believes it.

[N. Narokov, Mnimyye Velichiny, Roman v 2-kh Chastyakh (Imaginary Values; a Novel in Two
Parts), New York, Chekhov Publishing House, 1952.]

The interpretations of earlier artists, for example, Leonid Andreyev, seem today somehow to belong
willy-nilly to Krylov's time, a century and a half ago. And for that matter, what fantasist could have
imagined the death cells of 1937? Of neces- sity, he would have woven his psychological threads :
what it was like to wait, how the condemned man kept listening, and the like. But who could have
foreseen and described such unexpected sensations on the part of prisoners condemned to death as:

1. Prisoners awaiting execution suffered from the cold. They had to sleep on the cement floor under
the windows, where it was 28 degrees Fahrenheit. (Strakhovich.) You could freeze to death while
you were waiting to be shot.



2. They suffered from being in stuffy, overcrowded cells. Into a cell intended for solitary
confinement they would shove seven {never fewer), sometimes ten, fifteen, even twenty-eight
prisoners awaiting execution. (Strakhovich in Leningrad, 1942.) And they remained packed in this
way for weeks or even months! What kind of nightmare was your seven to be hanged? People in
these circumstances don't think about execution, and it's not being shot they worry about, but how to
move their legs, how to turn over, how to get a gulp of air.

In 1937, when up to forty thousand prisoners were being held at one time in the prisons of
Ivanovo — the internal prison of the NKVD, No. 1, No. 2, and the cells for preliminary detention —
although they were just barely designed to hold three to four thousand. Prison No. 2 held a mixture
of prisoners under inter- rogation, prisoners condemned to camp, prisoners sentenced to be executed,
prisoners whose death sentences had been com- muted, and ordinary thieves — and all of them stood
for several days so jammed in against each other in one big cell that it was impossible either to raise
or lower an arm and those who were shoved up against the bunks could easily break their legs on the
edges. It was winter, but in order not to be suffocated the prisoners broke the glass in the windows.
(It was in this cell that the old Bolshevik Alalykin, with his snow-white head of hair — he had joined
the Party in 1898 and had quit the Party in 1917 after the April Theses — waited for his death
sentence to be carried out.)

3. Prisoners sentenced to death also suffered from hunger. They waited such a long time after the
death sentence had been imposed that their principal sensation was no longer the fear of being shot
but the pangs of hunger: where could they get something to eat? In 1941 Aleksandr Babich spent
seventy-five days in a death cell in the Krasnoyarsk Prison. He had already reconciled himself to
death and awaited execution as the only possible end to his unsuccessful life. But he began to swell
up from starvation. At that point, they commuted his death sentence to ten years, and that was when
he began his camp career. And what was the record stay in a death cell? Who knows? Vsevolod
Petrovich Golitsyn, the elder of a death cell, so to speak, spent 140 days in it in 1938. But was that a
record? The glory of Russian science, famed geneticist N. I. Vavilov, waited several months for his
execution — yes, maybe even a whole year. As a prisoner still under death sentence he was evacuated
to the Saratov Prison, where he was kept in a basement cell that had no window. When his death
sentence was commuted in the sum- mer of 1942, he was transferred to a general cell, and he could
not even walk. Other prisoners carried him to the daily outdoor walk, supporting him under the arms.

4. Prisoners sentenced to death were given no medical at- tention. Okhrimenko was kept in a death
cell for a long time in 1938, and he became very ill. Not only did they refuse to put him in the
hospital, but the doctor took forever to come to see him. When she finally did come, she didn't go
into the cell; instead, without examining him or even asking him any questions, she handed him
some powders through the bars. And fluid began to accumulate in Strakhovich's legs — dropsy. He
told the jailer about it — and they sent him, believe it or not, a dentist.

And when a doctor did enter the picture, was it right for him to cure the prisoner under sentence of
death — in other words, to prolong his expectation of death? Or did humanitarianism dictate that the
doctor should insist on execution as quickly as possible? Here is another little scene from
Strakhovich: The doctor entered and, talking with the duty jailer, he pointed a finger at the prisoners
awaiting execution: "He's a dead man! He's a dead man! He's a dead man!" (He was pointing out to
the jailer the victims of malnutrition and insisting that it was wrong to torment people so, that it was
time to shoot them.)

What, in fact, was the reason for holding them so long? Weren't there enough executioners? One
must point out that the prison authorities often suggested to and even asked many of the condemned
prisoners to sign appeals for commutation; and when prisoners objected strongly and refused, not
wanting any more "deals," they signed appeals in the prisoners' names. And at the very least it took
months for the papers to move through the twists and turns of the machine.



A clash between two different institutions was probably in- volved. The interrogatory and judicial
apparatus — as we learned from the members of the Military Collegium, they were one and the
same — anxious to expose nightmarish and appalling cases, could not impose anything less than a
deserved penalty on the criminals — death. But as soon as the sentences had been pro- nounced and
entered into the official record of interrogation and trial, the scarecrows now called condemned men
no longer interested them. And, in actual fact, there hadn't been any sedi- tion involved, nor would
the life of the state be affected in any way if these condemned men remained alive. So they were left
entirely to the prison administration. And that administration, which was closely associated with
Gulag, looked at prisoners from the economic point of view. To them the important ^^Mre5 were not
an increase in the number of executions but an increase in the manpower sent out to the Archipelago.

And that is exactly the light in which Sokolov, the chief of the internal prison of the Big House in
Leningrad, viewed Strakhovich, who finally became bored in the death cell and asked for paper and
pencil for his scientific work. In a notebook he first composed "On the Interaction of a Liquid and a
Solid Moving in It," and then "Calculations for Ballistas, Springs and Shock Absorbers," and then
"Bases of the Theory of Stability." They had already allotted him an individual "scientific" cell and
fed him better, and questions began to come to him from the Leningrad Front. He worked out for
them "Volumetric Weapons' Fire Against Aircraft." And it all ended with Zhdanov's com- muting his
death sentence to fifteen years. (The mail from the mainland was slow, but soon his regular
commutation order came from Moscow, and it was more generous than Zhdanov's: merely a tenner.)

[Strakhovich has all his prison notebooks even now. And his "scientific career" outside the bars only
began with them. He was destined later on to head up one of the first projects in the U.S.S.R. for a
turbojet engine.]

And N.P., a mathematician with the rank of assistant pro- fessor, was exploited by the interrogator
Kruzhkov (yes, yes, that same thief) for his personal ends. Kruzhkov was taking correspondence
courses. And so he summoned P. from the death cell and gave him problems to solve in the theory of
functions of a complex variable for Kruzhkov's assignments (and probably they weren't even his
either).

So what did world literature understand about pre-execution suffering?

Finally, we learn from a story of Ch v that a death cell can be used as an element in

interrogation, as a method of coercing a prisoner. Two prisoners in Krasnoyarsk who had refused to
confess were suddenly summoned to a "trial," "sen- tenced" to the death penalty, and taken to the

death cell. (Ch v said: "They were subjected to a staged trial." But in a context in which every

trial is staged, what word can we use to distinguish this sort of pseudo trial from the rest? A stage on
a stage, or a play within a play, perhaps?) They let them get a good swallow of that deathlike life.
And then they put in stoolies who were allegedly sentenced to die also and who suddenly be- gan to
repent having been so stubborn during interrogation and begged the jailer to tell the interrogator that
they were now ready to sign everything. They were given their confessions to sign and then taken
out of the cell during the day — in other words, not to be shot.

And what about the genuine prisoners in that cell who had served as the raw material for the
interrogators' game? They no doubt experienced reactions of their own when people in there
"repented" and were pardoned? Well, of course, but those are the producer's costs, so to speak.

They say that Konstantin Rokossovsky, the future marshal, was twice taken into the forest at night
for a supposed execution. The firing squad leveled its rifles at him, and then they dropped them, and
he was taken back to prison. And this was also mak- ing use of "the supreme measure" as an
interrogator's trick. But it was all right; nothing happened; and he is alive and healthy and doesn't
even cherish a grudge about it.



And almost always a person obediently allows himself to be killed. Why is it that the death penalty
has such a hypnotic effect? Those pardoned recall hardly anyone in their cell who offered any
resistance. But there were such cases. In the Lenin- grad Kresty Prison in 1932, the prisoners
sentenced to execution took the jailers' revolvers away and opened fire. Following this, a different
approach was adopted: After peering through the peephole to locate the person they wanted to take,
they swarmed into the cell — five armed jailers at a time — and rushed to grab their man. There were
eight prisoners under sentence of death in the cell, but every one of them, after all, had sent a petition
to Kalinin and every one expected a commutation, and therefore: "You today, me tomorrow." They
moved away and looked on indifferently while the condemned man was tied up, while he cried out
for help, while they shoved a child's rubber ball into his mouth. (Now, looking at that child's ball,
could one really guess all its possible uses? What a good example for a lecturer on the dialectical
method!)

Does hope lend strength or does it weaken a man? If the con- demned men in every cell had ganged
up on the executioners as they came in and choked them, wouldn't this have ended the executions
sooner than appeals to the All-Russian Central Executive Committee? When one is already on the
edge of the grave, why not resist?

But wasn't everything foredoomed anyway, from the moment of arrest? Yet all the arrested crawled
along the path of hope on their knees, as if their legs had been amputated.

Vasily Grigoryevich Vlasov remembers that night after he'd been sentenced when he was being
taken through dark Kady, and four pistols were brandished on four sides of him. His main thought
was: "What if they shoot right now, as a provocation, claiming I was trying to escape?" Obviously he
didn't yet believe in his sentence. He still hoped to live.

They confined him in the police room. He was allowed to lie down on the desk to sleep, and two or
three policemen kept continuous guard by the light of a kerosene lamp. They talked among
themselves: "I kept listening and listening for four days, and I never could understand what they
were being condemned for." "It's not for us to understand."

Vlasov lived in this room for five days: they were waiting for an official confirmation of the verdict
in order to execute them right there in Kady; it was not easy to convoy the condemned men to some
other point. Someone sent a telegram for Vlasov requesting pardon: "I do not admit my guilt, and I
request that my life be spared." There was no reply. During these days Vlasov's hands shook so that
he could not lift his spoon to his mouth and, instead, picked up his bowl and drank directly from it.
Klyugin visited him to jeer. (Soon after the Kady case, he was transferred from Ivanovo to Moscow.
That year saw swift ascendancies and swift declines among those crimson stars of the Gulag heaven.
The time was approaching when they, too, would be hurled into that same pit, but they didn't know
it.)

Neither confirmation nor commutation of the sentence arrived, so they had to take the four
condemned men to Kineshma. They took them in four one-and-a-half-ton trucks, with one
condemned man guarded by seven policemen in each truck.

In Kineshma they were put in the crypt of a monastery. (Monastery architecture, liberated from
monkish ideology, was very useful for us.) At this point some other condemned prisoners were
added to their group, and they were all taken in a prisoners' railroad car to Ivanovo.

In the freight yard in Ivanovo they separated three from the rest — Saburov, Vlasov, and one of the
men from the other group — and immediately took the others away — to be shot — so as not to crowd
the prison any further. And thus it was that Vlasov said farewell to Smimov.

The three others were put in the courtyard of Prison No. 1 in the dank and raw October air and held



there for four hours while they led out, led in, and searched other groups of prisoners in transit.
There still was no actual proof that they wouldn't be shot that very day. During those four hours, they
had to sit there on the ground and think about it. At one point Saburov thought they were being taken
to be shot, but they were actually taken to a cell instead. He did not cry out, but he gripped his
neighbor's arm so hard that the latter yelled with pain. The guards had to drag Saburov and prod him
with their bayonets.

There were four death cells in this prison — in the same cor- ridor as the juvenile cells and the
hospital cells! The death cells had two doors: the customary wooden door with a peephole and a door
made of iron grating; each door had two locks, and the jailer and the block supervisor each had a key
to a different one, so the doors could be opened only by the two together. Cell 43 was on the other
side of a wall of the interrogator's office, and at night, while the condemned men were waiting to be
executed, their ears were tormented by the screams of prisoners being tortured.

Vlasov was put into Cell 61. This was a cell intended for solitary confinement, sixteen feet long and
a little more than three feet wide. Two iron cots were anchored to the floor by thick iron bolts, and
on each cot two condemned men were lying, their heads at opposite ends. Fourteen other prisoners
were lying crosswise on the cement floor.

Though it has long been well known that even a corpse has a right to three arshins of earth (and even
that seemed too little to Chekhov), in this cell each of the condemned had been allotted, while
waiting for death, a little less than a third of that!

Vlasov asked whether executions were carried out immedi- ately. "See for yourself. We've been here
for ages and we're still alive."

The time of waiting began — of the well-known kind: the prisoners didn't sleep all night long; in a
state of total depression, they waited to be led out to death; they listened for every rustling in the
corridor. (And the worst thing was that endless waiting destroys the will to resist.) Particularly
nerve-racking were the nights following a day on which someone received a commutation of
sentence. He went off with cries of happiness, and fear thick- ened in the cell. After all, rejections as
well as commutation had rolled down from the high mountain that day. And at night they would
come for someone.

Sometimes the locks rattled at night and hearts fell: Is it for me? Not me! ! And the turnkey would
open the wooden door for some nonsense or other: "Take your things off the window sill." That
unlocking of the door probably took a year off the lives of all nineteen inmates; maybe if that door
was unlocked a mere fifty times, they wouldn't have to waste bullets! But how grateful to him
everyone was because everything was all right: "We'll take them off right away, citizen chief!"

After the morning visit to the toilet, they went to sleep, liberated from their fears. Then the jailer
brought in the pail of gruel and said: "Good morning!" According to prison rules, the inner, iron door
was supposed to be opened only in the presence of the duty officer for the prison. But, as is well
known, human beings are better and lazier than their rules and instruc- tions, and in the morning the
jailer came in without the duty officer and greeted them quite humanly — no, it was even more
precious than that: "Good morning!"

To whom else on all the earth was that morning as good as it was to them! Grateful for the warmth
of that voice and the warmth of that dishwater, they drifted off to sleep until noon. (They ate only in
the morning!) Many were unable to eat when they woke during the day. Someone had received a
parcel. Rela- tives might or might not know about the death sentence. Once in the cell, these parcels
became common property, but they lay and rotted there in the stagnant damp.

By day there was still a little life and activity in the cell. The block supervisor might come around —



either gloomy Tarakanov or friendly Makarov — and offer paper on which to write petitions, and ask
whether any of them who had some money wanted to buy smokes from the commissary. Their ques-
tions seemed either too outrageous or extraordinarily human: the pretense was being made that they
weren't condemned men at all, was that it?

The condemned men broke off the bottoms of matchboxes, marked them like dominoes, and played
away. Vlasov eased his tension by telling someone about the Consumer Cooperatives, and his
narrative always took on a comic touch.

[His stories about the consumer cooperatives are remarkable and deserve to be published.]

Yakov Petrovich Kolpakov, the Chairman of the Sudogda District Executive Com- mittee, a
Bolshevik since the spring of 1917 who joined up at the front, sat for dozens of days without
changing his position, squeezing his head in his hands, his elbows on his knees, always staring at the
same spot on the wall. (It must have been so jolly to recall the spring of 1917.) Vlasov's garrulity
irritated him: "How can you?" And Vlasov snapped back at him: "And what are you doing?
Preparing yourself for heaven?" Vlasov spoke with round "o's" even in a fast retort. "For myself, I've
decided one thing only. I'm going to tell the executioner: 'You alone, not the judges, not the
prosecutors, you alone are guilty of my death, and you are going to have to live with it! If it weren't
for you willing executioners, there would be no death sen- tences!' So then let him kill me, the rat!"

Kolpakov was shot. Konstantin Sergeyevich Arkadyev, the former Manager of the Aleksandrov
District Agricultural De- partment in Vladimir Province, was shot. Somehow, in his case, the
farewells were particularly hard. During the night six guards came tramping in for him, making a big
rush of it, while he, gentle, well mannered, kept turning around, twisting his cap in his hands, putting
off the moment of his leavetaking — from the last people on earth for him. And when he said his final
"Fare- well," you could hardly hear his voice.

At the very first moment, when the victim has been pointed out, the rest are relieved (It's not me!).
But right after he has been taken away, the ones left behind are in a state that is hardly any easier to
bear than his. All the next day, those left behind are destined to silence and they won't want to eat.

However, Geraska, the young fellow who broke up the build- ing of the village soviet, ate well and
slept a lot, getting used to things, even here, with typical peasant facility. He somehow couldn't
believe they would shoot him. (And they didn't. They commuted his sentence to a tenner.)

Several of the inmates turned gray in three or four days before their cellmates' eyes.

When people wait so long for execution, their hair grows, and orders are given for the whole cell to
get haircuts, for the whole cell to get baths. Prison existence goes on, without regard to sentences.

Some individuals lost the ability to speak intelligibly and to understand. But they were left there to
await their fate anyway. Anyone who went insane in the death cell was executed insane.

Many sentences were commuted. It was right then, in that fall of 1937, that fifteen- and twenty-year
terms were introduced for the first time since the Revolution, and in many cases they replaced the
executioners' bullets. There were also commuta- tions to ten-year sentences. And even iofive years.
In the country of miracles even such miracles as this were possible: yesterday he deserved to be
executed, and this morning he gets a juvenile sentence; he is a minor criminal, and in camp he may
even be able to move around without convoy.

V. N. Khomenko, a sixty-year-old Cossack captain from the Kuban, was also imprisoned in their
cell. He was the "soul of the cell," if a death cell can be said to have a soul: he cracked jokes; he
smiled to himself; he didn't act as if things were bad. He had become unfit for military service way



back after the Japanese War, had studied horse breeding, and then served in the pro- vincial local
self-government council; by the thirties he was at- tached to the Ivanovo Provincial Agricultural
Department as "inspector of the horse herd of the Red Army." In other words, he was supposed to
see to it that the best horses went to the army. He was arrested and sentenced to be shot for
wrecking — for recom- mending that stallions be gelded before the age of three, by which means he
allegedly "subverted the fighting capacity of the Red Army." Khomenko appealed the verdict. Fifty-
five days later the block supervisor came around and pointed out to him that he had addressed his
appeal to the wrong appeals jurisdiction. Right then and there, propping the paper against the wall
and using the block supervisor's pencil, Khomenko crossed out one jurisdiction and substituted
another, as if it were a request for a pack of cigarettes. Thus clumsily corrected, the appeal made the
rounds for another sixty days, so Khomenko had been awaiting death for four months. (As for
waiting a year or two, after all, we spend year after year waiting for the angel of death! Isn't our
whole world just a death cell? ) And one day complete rehabilitation for Khomenko arrived. (In the
interval since his sentence, Voroshilov had given orders that gelding should be done before age
three.) Die one minute and dance the next!

Many sentences were commuted, and many prisoners had high hopes. But Vlasov, comparing his
case with those of the others, and keeping in mind his conduct at the trial as the principal factor, felt
that things were likely to go badly for him. They had to shoot someone. They probably had to shoot
at least half of those condemned to death. So he came to believe they would shoot him. And he
wanted just one thing — not to bow his head when it happened. That recklessness which was one of
his charac- teristics returned to him and increased within him, and he was all set to be bold and
brazen to the very end.

And an opportunity came his way. Making the rounds of the prison for some reason — most likely
just to give himself a thrill — the Chief of the Investigation Department of Ivanovo State Security,
Chinguli, ordered the door of their cell opened and stood on the threshold. He spoke to someone and
asked: "Who is here from the Kady case?"

He was dressed in a short-sleeved silk shirt, which had just begun to appear in Russia and therefore
still seemed effeminate.

And either he or his shirt was doused in a sweetish perfume that drifted into the cell.

Vlasov swiftly jumped up on the cot and shouted shrilly: "What kind of colonial officer is this? Get
out of here, you murderer!" And from that height he spat juicily full into ChinguU's face.

And he hit his mark.

Chinguli wiped his face and retreated. Because he had no right to enter the cell without six guards,
and maybe not even with six guards either.

A reasonable rabbit ought not to behave in that fashion. What if Chinguli had been dealing with your
case at that moment and was the one to decide whether to commute or not? After all, he must have
had a reason for asking: "Who is here from the Kady case?" That was probably why he came.

But there is a limit, and beyond it one is no longer willing, one finds it too repulsive, to be a
reasonable little rabbit. And that is the limit beyond which rabbits are enlightened by the common
understanding that all rabbits are foredoomed to become only meat and pelts, and that at best,
therefore, one can gain only a postponement of death and not hfe in any case. That is when one
wants to shout: "Curse you, hurry up and shoot!"

It was this particular feeling of rage which took hold of Vlasov even more intensely during his forty-
one days of waiting for execution. In the Ivanovo Prison they had twice suggested that he write a



petition for pardon, but he had refused.



But on the forty- second day they summoned him to a box where they informed him that the
Presidium of the Supreme Soviet had commuted the supreme measure of punishment to twenty years
of imprisonment in corrective-labor camps with dis- enfranchisement for five additional years.

The pale Vlasov smiled wryly, and even at that point words did not fail him:

"It is strange. I was condemned for lack of faith in the victory of socialism in our country. But can
even Kalinin himself believe in it if he thinks camps will still be needed in our country twenty years
from now?"

At the time it seemed quite inconceivable: after twenty years. Strangely, they were still needed even
after thirty.

Chapter 12

Tyurzak

Oh, that good Russian word "ostrog" — meaning "jail." What a powerful word it is and how well put
together. One senses in it the strength of those thick, impenetrable walls from which one cannot
escape. And it is all expressed in just six letters. And it has so many interesting connotations deriving
from words that are close to it in sound: as, for instance, strogost — meaning "severity"; and
ostroga — meaning "harpoon"; and ostrota — meaning "sharpness" (the sharpness of the porcupine's
quills when they land in your snout, the sharpness of the blizzard lashing your frozen face, the
sharpness of the pointed stakes of the camp perimeter, and the sharpness of the barbed wire too); and
the word "ostorozhnost" — meaning "caution" (a convict's caution) — is somewhere close too; and
then the word "rog" — meaning "horn." Yes, indeed, the horn juts out boldly and is pointed for- ward!
It is aimed straight at us.

And if one glances over all Russia's jail customs and conduct, at the entire institution during, say, the
last ninety years, then you'll see not just one horn really, but two horns. The Narodnaya Volya
("People's Will") revolutionaries began at the tip of one horn, right where it gores, right where it's
too excruciatingly pain- ful to take even on the breastbone. They kept wearing it down gradually
until it got rounded off, shrank to a stump, and was hardly a horn any longer, and finally became just
a woolly open spot (this was the beginning of the twentieth century). But then, after 1917, the first
swelling of a new knob could be felt, and there, there, splaying out and with the slogan "You don't
have the right!" — it began to thrust upward again, and to narrow to a point and harden, to acquire a
homy surface — until by 1938 it was pinning the human being right in that gap between the collar-
bone and the neck: tyurzak!

[Tyurzak=TYURemnoye ZAKlyucheniye = prison confinement. Tyurzak is an official term.]

And once a year, the single stroke of a watchman's bell could be heard in the night in the distance:
"TONnnnnn!"

[TON=Tyurma Osobogo Naznacheniya=Special Purpose Prison. TON is likewise an official
abbreviation.]

If we pursue this parabola with the help of one of the prisoners in the Schlusselburg Fortress near St.
Petersburg, we find that in- itially things were pretty bad. 3 The prisoner had a number, and no one
called him by his family name; the gendarmes acted as if they had been trained in the Lubyanka.
They didn't speak a word on their own. If you stammered out: "We . . . ," the reply came: "Speak
only for yourself!" The silence of the grave. The cell was in eternal shadows, the windows were



frosted glass, the floor asphalt. The hinged ventilation pane in the window was open for forty
minutes a day. The food consisted of grits and cabbage soup without meat. They would not allow
you any scholarly books from the library. You wouldn't see another human being for two years at a
stretch. Only after three years would they let you have sheets of paper — numbered.

[According to the account of M. Novorussky, from 1884 to 1906 three prisoners in Schliisselburg
committed suicide and five others went insane.]

And then, little by little, things got to be more lenient as the point of the horn got rounded off; there
was white bread; and then the prisoners were allowed tea and sugar; one could have money and
could buy things in addition to the rations; smoking was permitted; they put transparent glass in the
windows; and the transom could be kept open all the time; they painted the walls a light color; in no
time at all you could get books by subscribing to the St. Petersburg library; there were gratings
between the garden plots; one could converse through them, and prisoners even delivered lectures to
other prisoners. By then the prisoners were urging the prison adminis- tration: "Give us more land to
work on, more!" So they planted two large prison courtyards in flowers and vegetables — no fewer
than 450 varieties ! And then there were scientific collections, a carpentry shop, a smithy, and they
could earn money and buy books, even Russian political books, and also magazines from abroad.
And they wrote their families and got letters from them. And they could go out to walk the whole
day long if they liked.

[P. A. Krasikov, who, as we have seen, later condemned the Metropolitan Veniamin to death, read
Marx's Capital in the Peter and Paul Fortress. (But he was there only a year, and then they let him
out.)]

And gradually, as Figner recollects, "it was no longer the superintendent who shouted at the
prisoners, but we who shouted at him." In 1902, because he refused to forward a protest of hers, she
ripped the shoulder boards off his uniform. And the result was that a military investigator came and
apologized profusely to Figner for the ignoramus superintendent!

How did that horn come to shrink and broaden? Figner ex- plains it to some extent by the
humanitarian attitudes of indi- vidual prison superintendents, and also by the fact that the "gen-
darmes became friendly with the prisoners," got used to them. One significant factor certainly was
the prisoners' determination and dignity and adroitness in conducting themselves. But nonetheless I
myself believe that it was the temper of the times: this moisture and freshness in the air which drove
away the thundercloud; this breeze of freedom, which was sweeping through society, it was decisive.
Without it one could have given the gendarmes instruc- tions from the Short Course every Monday,
and kept tightening things up, kept putting the screws on. And instead of "impressed labor," Vera
Nikolayevna Figner, for tearing off an officer's shoulder boards, would have gotten nine grams in the
back of her head in a cellar.

The weakening and shaking up of the Tsarist prison system did not come about on its own, of course,
but because all society, in concert with the revolutionaries, was shaking it up and ridi- culing it in
every possible way. Tsarism lost its chance to survive not in the street skirmishes of February but
several decades earlier, when youths from well-to-do families began to consider a prison term an
honor; when army officers (even guard officers) began to regard it as dishonorable to shake the hand
of a gendarme. And the more the prison system weakened, the more clearly evident were the
triumphant ethics of the political prisoners, and the more visibly did the members of the
revolutionary parties realize their strength and regard their own laws as superior to those of the state.

And that was how Russia of 1917 arrived, bearing 1918 on its shoulders. The reason we have
proceeded immediately to 1918 is that the subject of our investigation does not permit us to dwell on
1917. In February, 1917, all political prisons, both those used for interrogation and those in which
sentences were served, and all hard-labor prisons as well were emptied. It is a wonder that all the



jailers managed to get through the year. Perhaps to make ends meet they simply set to work raising
potatoes in their vegetable gardens. (But from 1918 on, things began to get much better for them, and
at Shpalemaya Prison they were still serving the new regime even in 1928, and why not!)

In December, 1917, it had already become clear that it was altogether impossible to do without
prisons, that some people simply couldn't be left anywhere except behind bars (see Chap- ter 2,
above), because — well, simply because there was no place for them in the new society. And so it was
that the new rulers managed to feel their way across the space between the two horns and grope for
the budding of the second horn.

Of course, they proclaimed immediately that the horrors of the Tsarist prisons would not be repeated;
that fatiguing correction would not be permitted; that there would be no compulsory silence in
prison, no solitary confinement, no separating the prisoners from one another during outdoor walks,
no marching in step and single file, not even any locked cells. Go ahead, dear guests, get together,
and talk as much as you like and complain about the Bolsheviks. And the attention of the new prison
authori- ties was directed toward the combat readiness of the prison guards outside the walls and the
takeover of the stock of prisons inherited from the Tsar. (This was one particular part of the
machinery of state that did not have to be destroyed and rebuilt from its foundations.) Fortunately, it
turned out that the Civil War had not resulted in the destruction of all the principal central prisons
and jails. What was really necessary, however, was to repudiate all those old, besmirched words. So
now they called them political isolators — political detention centers — demonstrat- ing with this
phrase their view of the members of once revolution- ary parties as political enemies and stressing
not the punitive role of the bars but only the necessity of isolating (and only tempor- arily, it
appeared) these old-fashioned revolutionaries from the onward march of the new society. So that
was how the arches of the old central prisons (evidently including the one in Suzdal from the very
beginning of the Civil War) came to receive SR's, Social Democrats, and Anarchists.

They all returned to prison with a consciousness of their rights as convicts and a long-established
tradition of how to stand up for them. They accepted as their legal due a special political ration
(conceded by the Tsar and confirmed by the Revolution), which included half a pack of cigarettes a
day; purchases from the market (cottage cheese, milk) ; unrestricted walks outdoors during most
hours of the day; being addressed with the formal personal pronoun by prison personnel and not
having to stand up when addressed by them; confinement of husband and wife in the same cell; the
right to have newspapers, magazines, books, writing materials, and personal articles, even including
razors and scissors; sending and receiving letters three times a month; visits from rela- tives once a
month; windows without bars, of course (at that time the concept of the "muzzle" did not exist) ;
unrestricted visits from cell to cell; courtyards with greenery and lilacs for outdoor walks; the
freedom to choose companions for outdoor walks and to toss small mailbags from one courtyard to
another; and the dispatching of pregnant women from prison into exile two months before they were
due to give birth.

[From 1918 on, they did not hesitate to imprison women SR's, even when they were pregnant.]

All this was just the politregime — the prison regimen for po- litical prisoners. But the political
prisoners of the twenties re- membered well something even more important: self-government for
political prisoners, and hence even in prison the sense of one- self as part of a whole, a member of a
community. Self -govern- ment (the free election of spokesmen who represented all the interests of
all the prisoners in negotiations with the prison ad- ministration) weakened the pressure on the
individual because all shoulders bore it together; and it augmented each protest because all voices
spoke as one.

They undertook to defend all this! And the prison authorities undertook to take it all away from
them. And a silent battle began in which no artillery shells were fired, and rifle shots only rarely, and
the crash of broken glass wasn't audible even half a verst away. A mute struggle went on for vestiges



of freedom, for vestiges of the right to have individual opinions, and it went on for almost twenty
years — but no large, richly illustrated volumes describing it have ever been published. And all its
ups-and-downs, its catalogue of victories and of defeats, are almost lost to us now, because, after all,
there is no written language in the Archipelago and oral communication is broken off when people
die. And only random particles of that struggle have occasionally come down to us, illuminated by
moonlight that is indirect and indistinct.

And since that time we have grown so supercilious! We are familiar with tank battles; we know
about nuclear explosions. What kind of struggle is it over the question of whether cells are kept
locked and whether prisoners, to exercise their right to com- municate, can openly spell out
messages to each other by knock- ing on the walls, shout from window to window, drop notes from
floor to floor on threads, and insist that at least the elected spokes- men of the various party fractions
be allowed to move freely among the cells? What sort of a struggle is it to us when the chief of the

Lubyanka goes into the cell and the Anarchist Anna G va (in 1926) or the SR Katya Olitskaya

(1931) refuses to stand up when he enters? And that savage beast thought up a punishment for
Katya: to deprive her of the right to go to the toilet. What kind of struggle was it when two girls,
Shura and Vera (in 1925), in protest against the Lubyanka rule — intended to stifle personality — that
conversations may be carried on only in whispers, sang loudly in their cell (only about lilacs and the
spring), and thereupon the prison chief, the Latvian Dukes, dragged them through the corridor to the
toilet by their hair? Or when the students in a Stolypin car en route from Leningrad (1924) sang
revolutionary songs and the convoy thereupon de- prived them of water? They yelled out: "A Tsarist
convoy wouldn't have done that!" and the convoy beat them. Or when the SR Kozlov, at the transit
prison in Kem, loudly called the guards "executioners" — and because of that was dragged off and
beaten?

After all, we have gotten used to regarding as valor only valor in war (or the kind that's needed for
flying in outer space), the kind which jingle -jangles with medals. We have forgotten another concept
of valor — civil valor. And that's all our society needs, just that, just that, just that! That's all we need
and that's exactly what we haven't got.

In 1923, in Vyatka Prison, the SR Struzhinsky and his com- rades (how many were there? who were
they? what were they protesting against?) barricaded themselves in a cell, poured kero- sene over all
the mattresses, and incinerated themselves. Now that was an act altogether in the tradition of
Schlusselburg before the Revolution; and, not to go further, what an uproar such an act provoked
then, before the Revolution, and how all Russian society was aroused! But this time around neither
Vyatka knew about them, nor Moscow, nor history. And yet the human flesh crackled in the flames
in exactly the same way.

That was the initial purpose of imprisonment on the Solovetsky Islands (nicknamed Solovki) : it was
such a good place, cut off from communication with the outside world for half a year at a time. You
couldn't be heard from there no matter how loud you shouted, and you could even bum yourself up
for all anyone would know. In 1923 the imprisoned socialists were transported there from
Pertominsk on the Onega Peninsula — and split up among three isolated monasteries.

Take Savvatyevsky Monastery, consisting of the two buildings which had formerly been guest
quarters for religious believers on pilgrimage. Part of the lake was included in the prison compound.
In the early months everything seemed to be all right: they had their special political regimen,
several relatives succeeded in get- ting there for visits, and three spokesmen from the three parties
were wholly responsible for negotiating with the prison adminis- tration. And the monastery
compound was a free zone. Inside it the prisoners could talk, think, and do as they pleased without
hindrance.

But even then, at the dawn of the Archipelago, there were in- sistent unpleasant latrine rumors (not
yet so called) to the effect that the special political regimen was going to be liquidated.



And, in reality, having waited until the middle of December, until the White Sea was no longer
navigable, with the consequent cutoff in all communication with the outside world, the chief of the
Solovetsky Camp, Eichmans, [How like Eichmann, is it not?] announced that new instruc- tions had
indeed been received regarding the regimen. They wouldn't, of course, take everything away, not by
any means! They would cut down on correspondence, and then on something else, too, and, as the
most keenly felt measure of the lot, from that day on, December 20, 1923, the right to go in and out
of prison buildings twenty-four hours a day would be curtailed — limited to the daylight hours up to
6 P.M.

The party fractions decided to protest, and the SR's and An- archists called for volunteers: on the
first day of the new pro- hibition they would go outside exactly at 6 P.M. But, as it turned out,
Nogtyev, the chief of the Savvatyevsky Monastery Prison, had such an itchy trigger finger that even
before the appointed hour of 6 (and maybe their watches showed different times; after all, there was
no checking it by radio in those days), the guards entered the compound with rifles and opened fire
on the prisoners there, who were out of doors quite legally. Three volleys killed six and critically
wounded three.

The next day Eichmans himself showed up: there had been an unfortunate misunderstanding.
Nogtyev was removed (trans- ferred and promoted). A funeral was held for the victims. They sang in
chorus across the Solovetsky wilderness:

You fell a victim in a fateful fray.

(Was not this perhaps the last occasion when that long-drawn-out melody was permitted for newly
dead victims?) They pushed a great boulder onto the common grave and carved on it the names of
those who had been killed.

[In 1925 the stone was overturned, and the names on it were thus buried too. Any of you who
clamber about Solovki — seek it out and gaze upon it!]

One cannot say that the press concealed this event. Pravda, for example, carried a report in small
type: the prisoners had attacked the convoy, and six had been killed. The honest news- paper Rote
Fahne reported revolt on Solovki.

[One of the SR's in the Savvatyevsky Monastery was Yuri Podbelsky. He collected the medical
documents on the Solovetsky massacre — for publica- tion at some future date. But a year later, at the
Sverdlovsk Transit Prison, they discovered a false bottom in his suitcase and confiscated the material
he'd hidden. And that is how Russian history stumbles and falls.]

Yet the prisoners had defended the regimen successfully! And for a whole year no one spoke of
changing it.

For the whole of 1924, yes. But toward the end of the year, insistent rumors circulated again that
they were planning to in- troduce a new system in December. The Dragon had grown hungry again.
He wanted new victims. So even though the three monasteries in which socialists were confined —
Savvatyevsky, Troitsky, and Muksalmsky — were on separate islands, they man- aged, by
conspiratorial methods, to reach an agreement that all the party fractions in all three monasteries
would on one and the same day deliver an ultimatum to Moscow and to the Solovki ad- ministration:
They must either be removed from the Solovetsky Islands before navigation stopped or else the
previous political regimen must be left unchanged. The ultimatum stipulated a time limit of two
weeks, and then all three prisons would go on a hunger strike.

This kind of unity compelled attention. It wasn't the sort of thing you could allow to go in one ear
and out the other. One day before the time limit expired, Eichmans visited each monas- tery and



announced that Moscow had refused. And on the ap- pointed day a hunger strike began (not a dry
hunger strike — water was allowed) in all three monastery prisons (which were now unable to
communicate with each other). In Savvatyevsky, about two hundred people struck. Those who fell ill
were ex- empted from striking. A doctor from among the prisoners ex- amined the strikers every day.
A collective hunger strike is always more difficult to carry out than an individual one; after all, the
weakest rather than the strongest of the strikers can determine its outcome. The only point to a
hunger strike is to carry it out with implacable determination and in such a way that everyone knows
everyone else involved personally and trusts them fully. Given various party fractions, given several
hundred people, both dis- agreements and moral anguish on other people's behalf were in- evitable.
After fifteen days, it was necessary to vote by secret ballot in Savvatyevsky — the urn with the ballots
was taken from room to room — whether to continue or to lift the hunger strike.

And Moscow and Eichmans waited them out! After all, they were well fed, and there wasn't a peep
from the capital news- papers about the hunger strike, and there were no student pro- test meetings at
Kazan Cathedral. Silence was already confi- dently shaping our history.

The monasteries lifted the hunger strike. They had not won out, but they hadn't lost either. The
political regimen was left intact for the winter, except that cutting firewood in the forests was added,
but that was logical enough. And in the spring of 1925 it looked as though the hunger strike had
brought victory: the prisoners from all three monastery prisons were removed from Solovki! To the
mainland! No more Arctic night and no more half-year cut off from communication!

But both the convoy and their rations en route were very harsh for that time. And soon they were all
perfidiously tricked: On the pretext that their spokesmen would be more comfortable in the "staff
car with the stores and equipment, they were deprived of their leaders. The "staff" car was detached
at Vyatka, and the spokesmen were taken to the Tobolsk Isolator. Only at that point did it become
clear that the hunger strike of the previous fall had failed. The strong and influential spokesmen had
been taken away so as to tighten up on the rest. Yagoda and Katanyan personally directed the
incarceration of the former Solovetsky Islands pris- oners in the long-standing but until then unused
buildings of the Verkhne-Uralsk Isolator, which they thus "opened" in the spring of 1925 (under
Chief Dupper). It was destined to be a particular bugbear to prisoners for many decades ahead.

The relocated former Solovki prisoners immediately lost their freedom to move about. The cells
were locked. They succeeded in electing spokesmen nonetheless, but the spokesmen didn't have the
right to go from cell to cell. The unlimited circulation between cells of money, personal articles, and
books, which had existed earlier, was now forbidden. They shouted back and forth from window to
window — until the guard fired from his tower into the cells. In reply they organized a protest — they
broke windowpanes and destroyed prison equipment. (And, after all, breaking a windowpane is
something to think about twice. They might just not replace it all winter, and there would be no big
surprise in that. It was under the Tsar that the glaziers used to come on the run.) The struggle
continued, but it was now being carried on in desperation and under grave handicaps.

In the year 1928 (according to Pyotr Petrovich Rubin) some event or other precipitated a new joint
hunger strike by the entire Verkhne-Uralsk Isolator. But this time the earlier stem and solemn
atmosphere was absent, as were the approval of friends and a doctor of their own. On a certain day
of the strike, the jailers came bursting into the cells in overwhelming numbers, and simply began to
beat the weakened prisoners with clubs and boots. They beat them to within an inch of their lives —
and the hunger strike ended.

From our experience of the past and our literature of the past we have derived a naive faith in the
power of a hunger strike. But the hunger strike is a purely moral weapon. It presupposes that the
jailer has not entirely lost his conscience. Or that the jailer is afraid of public opinion. Only in such
circumstances can it be effective.



The Tsarist jailers were still inexperienced. They got nervous if one of their prisoners went on a
hunger strike; they exclaimed over it; they looked after him; they put him in the hospital. There are
many examples, but this work is not about them. It is even humorous to note that it was enough for
Valentinov to go on a hunger strike for twelve days: as a result, he not only achieved some relaxation
in the regimen but was totally released from in- terrogation — whereupon he went to Lenin in
Switzerland. Even in the Orel central hard-labor prison the strikers always won. They got the
regimen relaxed in 1912 and further relaxed in 1913, to the point of general access to outdoor walks
for all political hard-labor prisoners — who were obviously so unre- stricted by their supervisors that
they managed to compose and send out to freedom their appeal "to the Russian people." (And this
from the hard-labor prisoners of a central prison!) Further- more, it was published. (It's enough to
make one's eyes pop out of one's head! Someone has to have been crazy! ) It was published in 1914
in issue No. 1 of the Vestnik Katargi i Ssylki — the Hard- Labor and Exile Herald. (And what about
that Herald itself?

Should we, too, perhaps try to publish one like it?) In 1914, after only//ve days of a hunger strike —
admittedly, without water — Dzerzhinsky and four of his comrades obtained all their nu- merous
demands (which had to do with living conditions).

In those years, there were no dangers or difficulties for the prisoner beyond the torments of hunger.
They could not beat him up for going on a hunger strike, nor sentence him to a second term, nor
increase his term, nor shoot him, nor send him off on a prisoner transport. (All this was to come later
on.)

In the Revolution of 1905 and the years following it, the prisoners felt themselves to be masters of
the prison to such an extent that they did not even go to the trouble of declaring a hunger strike; they
simply destroyed prison property (so-called "obstructions" ), or went so far as to declare a strike,
although it might seem that for prisoners this would have hardly any mean- ing. Thus in the city of
Nikolayev in 1906, 197 prisoners in the local prison declared a "strike" in conjunction with people
outside. Outside the prison, leaflets in support of their strike were pub- lished and daily meetings
assembled in front of the prison. These meetings (and it goes without saying that the prisoners were
at the windows, which had, of course, no "muzzles") forced the administration to accept the demands
of the "striking" prisoners. After this, some people on the street and others behind the bars joined in
singing revolutionary songs. And things went on that way for eight days. (And nobody stopped
them! It was, after all, a year of postrevolutionary repression. ) On the ninth day all the demands of
the prisoners were satisfied! Similar incidents oc- curred at the time in Odessa, in Kherson, and in
Yelizavetgrad. That's how easily victory was attained then.

It would be interesting, incidentally, to compare the effective- ness of hunger strikes under the
Provisional Government, but those few Bolsheviks imprisoned from the July days until the Komilov
episode (Kamenev, Trotsky, and Raskolnikov for a while longer) evidently had no reason to go on a
hunger strike.

In the twenties, the lively picture of hunger strikes grows clouded (though that depends, of course,
on the point of view . . . ). This widely known weapon, which had justified itself so gloriously, was,
of course, taken over not only by recognized "politicals" but also by those who were not recognized
as such — the KR's (Article 58 — Counter- Revolutionaries) and all other kinds of riffraff. However,
those arrows which used to be so piercing had been blunted somehow, or else some iron hand had
checked them in midflight. True, written declarations of impend- ing hunger strikes were still
accepted, and nothing subversive was seen in them as yet. But unpleasant new rules were trotted out:
The hunger striker had to be isolated in a special solitary cell (in the Butyrki it was in the Pugachev
Tower). It was essential to keep any knowledge about the hunger strike not only from people outside,
who might protest publicly, and from prisoners in cells nearby, but even from those in the cell in
which the hunger striker had been imprisoned until that day — for that, too, con- stituted a public, and
it was necessary to separate him from it. This measure had as its nominal justification the argument



that the prison administration had to make sure that the hunger strike was going on honestly — that
others in the cell weren't sneaking food to the hunger striker. (And how had that been verified
previously? Through honest, "cross my heart" word of honor?)

Still, it was possible in those years to achieve at least one's personal demands by this means.

From the thirties on, state thinking about hunger strikes took a new turn. What did the state want
with even such watered-down, isolated, half-suppressed hunger strikes? Wasn't the ideal picture one
of prisoners who had no will of their own, nor the capacity to make their own decisions — and of a
prison administration that did their thinking and their deciding for them? These are, if you will, the
only prisoners who can exist in the new society. And so from the beginning of the thirties, they
stopped accepting declarations of hunger strikes as legal. "The hunger strike as a method of
resistance no longer exists," they proclaimed to Yeka- terina Olitskaya in 1932, and they said the
same thing to many others. The government has abolished your hunger strikes — and that's that. But
Olitskaya refused to obey and began to fast. They let her go on fasting in solitary for fifteen days.
Then they took her to the hospital and put milk and dried crusts in front of her to tempt her. But she
stood firm, and on the nineteenth day she won her victory: she got an extended outdoor period and
news- papers and parcels from the Political Red Cross. (That's how one had to moan and groan in
order to receive those legitimate relief parcels!) Overall, however, it was an insignificant victory and
paid for too dearly. Olitskaya recalls such foolish hunger strikes on the part of others too: people
starved up to twenty days in order to get delivery of a parcel or a change of companions for their
outdoor walk. Was it worth it? After all, in the New Type Prison one's strength, once lost, could not
be restored. The religious-sect member Koloskov fasted until he died on the twenty-fifth day. Could
one in general permit oneself to fast in the New Type Prison? After all, the new prison heads,
operating in secrecy and silence, had acquired several powerful methods of combating hunger
strikes:

1. Patience on the part of the administration. (We have seen enough of what this meant from
preceding examples.)

2. Deception. This, too, can be practiced thanks to total secrecy. When every step is reported by the
newspapers, you aren't going to do much deceiving. But in our country, why not? In 1933, in the
Khabarovsk Prison, S. A. Chebotaryev, demand- ing that his family be informed of his whereabouts,
fasted for seventeen days. (He had come from the Chinese Eastern Railroad in Manchuria and then
suddenly disappeared, and he was worried about what his wife might be thinking. ) On the
seventeenth day, Zapadny, the Deputy Chief of the Provincial GPU, and the Khabarovsk Province
prosecutor (their ranks indicate that lengthy hunger strikes were really not so frequent) came to see
him and showed him a telegraph receipt (There, they said, they had in- formed his wife!), and thus
persuaded him to take some broth. And the receipt was a fake! (Why had these high-ranking officials
gone to this trouble? Not, certainly, for Chebotaryev's life. Evi- dently, in the first half of the thirties
there was still some sort of personal responsibility on the part of higher-ups for long-drawn- out
hunger strikes.)

3. Forced artificial feeding. This method was adapted, with- out any question, from experience with
wild animals in captivity. And it could be employed only in total secrecy. By 1937 arti- ficial feeding
was, evidently, already in wide use. For example, in the group hunger strike of socialists in the
Yaroslavl Central Prison, artificial feeding was forced on everyone on the fifteenth day.

Artificial feeding has much in common with rape. And that's what it really is: four big men hurl
themselves on one weak being and deprive it of its one interdiction — they only need to do it once
and what happens to it next is not important. The element of rape inheres in the violation of the
victim's will: "It's not going to be the way you want it, but the way I want it; lie down and sub- mit."
They pry open the mouth with a flat disc, then broaden the crack between the jaws and insert a tube:
"Swallow it." And if you don't swallow it, they shove it farther down anyway and then pour liquefied



food right down the esophagus. And then they massage the stomach to prevent the prisoner from
resorting to vomiting. The sensation is one of being morally defiled, of sweetness in the mouth, and a
jubilant stomach gratified to the point of delight.

Science did not stand still, and other methods were developed for artificial feeding: an enema
through the anus, drops through the nose.

4. A new view of the hunger strike: that hunger strikes are a continuation of counterrevolutionary
activity in prison, and must be punished with a new prison term. This aspect promised to give rise to
a very rich new category in the practices of the New Type Prison, but it remained essentially in the
realm of threats. And it was not, of course, any sense of humor that cut it short, but most likely
simple laziness: why bother with all that when patience will take care of it? Patience and more
patience — the patience of a well-fed person vis-a-vis one who is starving.

Approximately in the middle of 1937, a new directive came: From now on the prison administration
will not in any respect be responsible for those dying on hunger strikes! The last vestige of personal
responsibility on the part of the jailers had disap- peared! (In these circumstances, the prosecutor of
the province would not have come to visit Chebotaryev!) Furthermore, so that the interrogator
shouldn't get disturbed, it was also announced that days spent on hunger strike by a prisoner under
interroga- tion should be crossed off the official interrogation period. In other words, it should not
only be considered that the hunger strike had not taken place, but the prisoner should be regarded as
not having been in prison at all during the period of the strike. Thus the interrogator would not be to
blame for being behind schedule. Let the only perceptible result of the hunger strike be the prisoner's
exhaustion!

And that meant: If you want to kick the bucket, go ahead!

Arnold Rappoport had the misfortune to declare a hunger strike in the Archangel NKVD Internal
Prison at the very moment when this directive arrived. It was a particularly severe form of hunger
strike, and that ought, it would seem, to have given it more impact. His was a "dry" strike — without
fluids — and he kept it up for thirteen days. (Compare the five-day "dry" strike of Dzerzhinsky, who
probably wasn't isolated in a separate cell. And who in the end won total victory.) And during those
thirteen days in solitary, to which Rappoport had been moved, only a medical assistant looked in
now and then. No doctor came. And no one from the administration took the sUghtest interest in
what he was demanding with his hunger strike. They never even asked him. The only attention the
administration paid him was to search his cell carefully, and they managed to dig out some hidden
makhorka and several matches. What Rappoport wanted was to put an end to the interrogator's
humiliation of him. He had prepared for his hunger strike in a thoroughly scientific way. He had
received a food parcel earlier, and so he ate only butter and ring-shaped rolls, baranki, and he quit
eating black bread a week before his strike. He starved until he could see the light through his hands.
He recalls experiencing a sensation of lightheadedness and clarity of thought. At a certain moment, a
kindly, compassionate woman jailer named Marusya came to his cell and whispered to him: "Stop
your hunger strike; it isn't going to help; you'll just die! You should have done it a week earlier." He
listened to her and called off his hunger strike without having gotten anywhere at all. Nevertheless,
they gave him hot red wine and a roll, and afterward the jailers took him back to the common cell in
a hand-carry. A few days later, his interrogation began again. But the hunger strike had not been
entirely useless: the interrogator had come to understand that Rappoport had will power enough and
no fear of death, and he eased up on the interrogation. "Well, now, it turns out you are quite a wolf,"
the interrogator said to him. "A wolf!" Rappoport affirmed. "And I'll certainly never be your dog."

Rappoport declared another hunger strike later on, at the Kotlas Transit Prison, but it turned out
somewhat comically. He announced that he was demanding a new interrogation, and that he would
not board the prisoner transport. They came to him on the third day: "Get ready for the prisoner
transport." "You don't have the right. I'm on a hunger strike!" At that point four young toughs picked



him up, carried him off, and tossed him into the bath. After the bath, they carried him to the
guardhouse. With nothing else left to do, Rappoport stood up and went to join the column of
prisoners boarding the prisoner transport — after all, there were dogs and bayonets at his back.

And that is how the New Type Prison defeated bourgeois hunger strikes.

Even a strong man had no way left him to fight the prison machine, except perhaps suicide. But is
suicide really resistance? Isn't it actually submission?

The SR Yekaterina Olitskaya thinks that the Trotskyites, and, subsequently, the Communists who
followed them into prison, did a great deal to weaken the hunger strike as a weapon for fighting
back: they declared hunger strikes too easily and lifted them too easily. She says that even the
Trotskyite leader I. N. Smirnov, after going on a hunger strike four days before their Moscow trial,
quickly surrendered and lifted it. They say that up to 1936 the Trotskyites rejected any hunger strike
against the Soviet government on principle, and never supported SR's and Social Democrats who
were on hunger strikes.

[But they always demanded support for themselves from the SR's and Social Democrats. On a
prisoner transport to Karaganda and the Kolyma in 1936, they addressed as traitors and provocateurs
all those who refused to sign their telegram to Kalinin protesting "against sending the vanguard of
the Revolution [i.e., themselves] to the Kolyma." (The story was told by Mako- tinsky.)]

Let history say how true or untrue that reproach is. However, no one paid for hunger strikes so much
and so grievously as the Trotskyites. (We will come to their hunger strikes and their strikes in camps
in Part III.)

Excessive haste in declaring and lifting hunger strikes was probably characteristic of impetuous
temperaments which reveal their feelings too quickly. But there were, after all, such natures, such
characters, among the old Russian revolutionaries, too, and there were similar temperaments in Italy
and France, but no- where, either in prerevolutionary Russia, in Italy, or in France, were the
authorities so successful in discouraging hunger strikes as in the Soviet Union. There was probably
no less physical sacrifice and no less spiritual determination in the hunger strikes in the second
quarter of our century than there had been in the first. But there was no public opinion in the Soviet
Union. And on that basis the New Type Prison waxed and grew strong. And instead of easy
victories, the prisoners suffered hard-earned de- feats.

Decades passed and time produced its own results. The hunger strike — the first and most natural
weapon of the prisoner — in the end became alien and incomprehensible to the prisoners themselves.
Fewer and fewer desired to undertake them. And to prison administrations the whole thing began to
seem either plain stupidity or else a malicious violation.

When, in 1960, Gennady Smelov, a nonpolitical offender, declared a lengthy hunger strike in the
Leningrad prison, the prosecutor went to his cell for some reason (perhaps he was making his regular
rounds) and asked him: "Why are you tor- turing yourself?"

And Smelov replied: "Justice is more precious to me than life."

This phrase so astonished the prosecutor with its irrelevance that the very next day Smelov was taken
to the Leningrad Special Hospital (i.e., the insane asylum) for prisoners. And the doctor there told
him:

"We suspect you may be a schizophrenic."

Along the rings of the horn, where it began to narrow to its point, the former central prisons arose.



rechristened, by the be- ginning of 1937, the "special isolators." The last little weaknesses were now
being squeezed out of the system, the last vestiges of light and air. And the hunger strike of the tired
socialists, their numbers sparse by now, in the Yaroslavl Penalty Isolator at the beginning of 1937
was one of their last, desperate efforts.

They were still demanding that everything should be restored to what it once had been. They were
demanding both the election of spokesmen and free communication between cells, but it is unlikely
that even they had hopes of this any longer. By a fifteen- day hunger strike, even though it ended
with their being force- fed through a tube, they had apparently succeeded in defending some portions
of their regimen: a one-hour period outdoors, access to the provincial newspaper, notebooks for their
writing. These they kept. But the authorities promptly took away their personal belongings and threw
at them the common prison cloth- ing of the special isolator. And a little while later, they cut half an
hour off their time outdoors. And then they reduced it by another fifteen minutes.

These were the same people who were being dragged through a sequence of prisons and exiles
according to the rules of the Big Solitaire. Some hadn't lived an ordinary, decent human life for ten
years; some for fifteen; all they had was this meager prison life, with hunger strikes to boot. A few
who had gotten used to winning out over the prison administrations before the Revolu- tion were still
alive. However, before the Revolution they were marching in step with Time against a weakening
enemy. And now Time was against them and allied with an enemy growing steadily stronger.
Among them were young people too (how strange that seems to us nowadays) — those who
considered them- selves SR's, Social Democrats, or Anarchists even after the parties themselves had
been battered out of existence — and the only future these new recruits had to look forward to was
life in prison.

The loneliness surrounding the entire prison struggle of the socialists, which became more hopeless
with every year that passed, grew more and more acute, approaching a vacuum in the end. That was
not how it had been under the Tsar: Throw open the prison doors and the public greeted them with
flowers. Now they leafed through the newspapers and saw that they were being drenched in
vituperation, with slops even. (For it was the socialists, after all, whom Stalin saw as the most dan-
gerous enemies of his socialism.) And the people were silent. And what could give them any reason
to dare suppose that the people had any kindly feelings left toward those they had not long before
elected to the Constituent Assembly? And finally the newspapers stopped showering profanity on
them because Rus- sian socialists had by that time come to seem so unimportant and so impotent and
even nonexistent. By this time these socialists were remembered outside in freedom only as
something belong- ing to the past — the distant past. And young people hadn't the slightest idea that
SR's and Mensheviks were still alive some- where. And in the sequence of Chimkent and Cherdyn
exile, and the Verkhne-Uralsk and Vladimir isolators — how could they not tremble in their dark
solitary-confinement cells, cells with "muzzles" by this time, and feel that perhaps their program and
their leaders had been mistaken, that perhaps their tactics and actions had been mistaken too? And all
their actions began to seem nothing but inaction — and their lives, devoted only to suffering, a fatal
delusion.

Their lonely prison struggle had been essentially undertaken for all of us, for all future prisoners
(even though they themselves might not think so, nor understand this), for how we would exist in
imprisonment and how we would be kept there. And if they had won out, then probably nothing of
what happened to us would have happened, nothing of what this book is about, all seven of its parts.

But they were beaten. They failed to protect either themselves or us.

In part, too, the canopy of loneliness spread over them because, in the very first postrevolutionary

years, having naturally accepted from the GPU the well-merited identification of politicals, they
naturally agreed with the GPU that all who were "to the right" [ I do not like these "left" and "right"
classifications; they are conditional concepts, they are loosely bandied about, and they do not convey



the essence.] of them, beginning with the Cadets, were not politicals but KR's — Counter-
Revolutionaries — the manure of history. And they also regarded as KR's those who suffered for their
faith in Christ. And whoever didn't know what "right" or "left" meant — and that, in the future,
would be all of us — they considered to be KR's also. And thus it was that, in part voluntarily, in part
involuntarily, keeping themselves aloof and shunning others, they gave their blessing to the future
"Fifty-eight" into whose maw they themselves would disappear.

Objects and actions change their aspect quite decisively de- pending on the position of the observer.
In this chapter we have been describing the prison stand of the socialists from their point of view.
And, as you see, it is illuminated by a pure and tragic light. But those KR's whom the politicals
treated so con- temptuously on Solovki, those KR's recall the politicals in their own way! "The
politicals? What a nasty crowd they were: they looked down their noses at everyone else; they stuck
to their own group; they demanded their own special rations all the time and their own special
privileges. And they kept quarreling among themselves incessantly." And how can one but feel that
there is truth here too? All those fruitless and endless arguments which by now are merely comical.
And those demands for additional rations for themselves in comparison with the masses of the
hungry and impoverished? In the Soviet period, the honorable appellation of politicals turned out to
be a poisoned gift. And then another reproach followed immediately: Why was it that the socialists,
who used to escape so easily under the Tsar, had become so soft in Soviet prisons? Where are their
escapes ? In general there were quite a few escapes, but who can remember any socialists among
them?

And, in turn, those prisoners "to the left" of the socialists — the Trotskyites and the Communists —
shunned the socialists, con- sidering them exactly the same kind of KR's as the rest, and they closed
the moat of isolation around them with an encircling ring.

The Trotskyites and the Communists, each considering their own direction more pure and lofty than
all the rest, despised and even hated the socialists (and each other) who were imprisoned behind the
bars of the same buildings and went outdoors to walk in the same prison courtyards. Yekaterina
Olitskaya recalls that in 1937, at the transit prison on Vanino Bay, when the socialists called to each
other across the fence between the men's and women's compounds, looking for fellow socialists and
report- ing news, the Communists Liza Kotik and Mariya Krutikova were indignant because they
might bring down punishment on them all by such irresponsible behavior. They said: "All our mis-
fortunes are due to those socialist rats! [A profound explanation, and so dialectical too!] They should
be choked!" And those two girls in the Lubyanka in 1925, whom I have already mentioned, sang
about spring and lilacs only because one of them was an SR and the second a member of the
Communist opposition, and they had no political song in common, and in fact the Com- munist-
deviationist girl shouldn't really have joined the SR girl in her protest at all.

And if in a Tsarist prison the different parties often joined forces in a common struggle (let us recall
in this connection the escape from the Sevastopol Central Prison), in Soviet prisons each political
group tried to ensure its own purity by steering clear of the others. The Trotskyites struggled on their
own, apart from the socialists and Communists; the Communists didn't struggle at all, for how could
one allow oneself to struggle against one's own government and one's own prison?

It turned out in consequence that the Communists in isolators and in prisons for long-termers were
restricted earlier and more cruelly than others. In 1928, in the Yaroslavl Central Prison, the
Communist Nadezhda Surovtseva went outdoors for fresh air in a single-file column that was
forbidden to engage in con- versation, while the socialists were still chattering in their own groups.
She was not permitted to tend the flowers in the courtyard — because they had been left by previous
prisoners who had struggled for their rights. And they deprived her of newspapers too. (However, the
Secret Political Department of the GPU permitted her to have complete sets of Marx and Engels,
Lenin and Hegel in her cell.) Her mother's visit to her took place virtually in the dark, and her
downcast mother died soon after- ward. (What must she have thought of her daughter's circum-



stances in prison?)



The difference between the treatment of socialist prisoners and that of the Communists persisted
many years, went far beyond this, and extended to a difference in rewards: in 1937-1938 the
socialists were imprisoned like the rest and they all got their tenners too. But, as a rule, they were not
forced to denounce themselves: they had, after all, never hidden their own, special, individual
views — which were quite enough to get them sen- tenced. But a Communist had no special,
individual views, so what, then, was he to be sentenced for if a self-denunciation wasn't forced out of
him?

Even though the enormous Archipelago was already spreading across the land, the prisons for long-
termers didn't fall into decay. The old jail tradition was being zealously carried on. Every- thing new
and invaluable which the Archipelago had contributed to the indoctrination of the masses was still
not enough in itself.

The deficiency was provided for by the complementary existence of the TON's — the Special Purpose
Prisons — and prisons for long-termers in general.

Not everyone swallowed up by the Great Machine was allowed to mingle with the natives of the
Archipelago. Well-known foreigners, individuals who were too famous or who were being held
secretly, purged gaybisty, could not by any means be seen openly in camps; their hauling a barrow
did not compensate for the disclosure and the consequent moral-political damage.

[This term actually exists! And it has a sky-blue swampy coloration!]

In the same way, the socialists, who were engaged in a continuous struggle for their prison rights,
could not conceivably be permitted to mingle with the masses but had to be kept separately and, in
fact, suffocated separately — in view of their special privileges and rights. Much later on, in the
fifties, as we shall learn later in this work, the Special Purpose Prisons were also needed to isolate
camp rebels. And in the last years of his life, disappointed in the possibilities of "reforming" thieves,
Stalin gave orders that various ringleaders of the thieves should also get tyurzak rather than camp.
And then, to be sure, it was necessary for the state to support free of charge in prison those prisoners
who because of their feebleness would have immediately died off in camp and would thus have
shirked their duty to serve out their terms. And others who couldn't possibly be used in camp work —
like the blind Kopeikin, a man of seventy who used to sit all day long in the market in Yuryevets on
the Volga. His songs and facetious comments won him ten years for KRD — Counter-Revolutionary
Activity — but in his case they had to substitute prison for camp.

The inventory of old jails, inherited from the Romanov dynasty, was, of necessity, looked after,
remodeled, strengthened, and perfected. Certain central prisons, like the one in Yaroslavl, were so
well and suitably appointed (doors plated with iron; table, stool, and cot permanently anchored in
each cell) that the only thing required to bring them up to date was the installation of "muzzles" on
the windows and the fencing in of the courtyards where the prisoners walked in order to reduce them
to the size of a cell (by 1937 all the trees on prison grounds had been cut down, all vegetable gardens
plowed under, and all grassy areas paved with asphalt). Others, like the one in Suzdal, required new
equipment, and the monastery arrangement had to be remodeled, but, after all, self-incarceration of a
body in a monastery and its incarceration in a prison by the state serve physically similar purposes,
and therefore the buildings were always easy to adapt. One of the buildings of the Sukhanovka
Monastery was adapted for use as a prison for long-termers. Of course, it was also neces- sary to
make up for losses from the Tsarist inventory: the con- version of the Peter and Paul Fortress in
Leningrad and of Schliisselburg near Leningrad into museums for tourists. The Vladimir Central
Prison was expanded and added to — with a big new building constructed under Yezhov. It was
heavily used and garnered many prisoners over those decades. We have already mentioned how the
Tobolsk Central Prison was in- augurated, and that Verkhne-Uralsk was opened in 1925 for



continuous and abundant use. (To our misfortune, all these isola- tors are still in use and are in
operation at the moment these lines are being written.) From Tvardovsky's poem "Distance Beyond
Distance" one can draw the conclusion that the Aleksandrovsk Central Prison wasn't empty in
Stalin's time either. We have less information about the one in Orel: it is feared that it suffered
serious damage during World War II. But not far from it was the well-equipped prison for long-
termers in Dmitrovsk-Or- lovsky.

During the twenties the prisoner's /oo J was very decent in the isolators for politicals (still called
"politizakrytki" — "political lock-ups" — by the prisoners): the lunches always included some meat;
fresh vegetables were served; milk could be bought in the commissary. In 1931-1933 the food
deteriorated sharply, but things were no better out in freedom at that time. Both scurvy and dizziness
from lack of food were no rarity in the prisons for politicals in those years. Later on the food
improved, but it was never the same as before. In 1947, in the Vladimir TON, I. Komeyev was
constantly hungry: one pound of bread, two pieces of sugar, two hot dishes which were not at all
filling; the only thing available in unlimited quantities was boiling water. (It will, of course, be said
once more that this was not a typical year and there was hunger outside in freedom, too, at the time.
This was when they generously allowed freedom to feed prison: unlimited parcels were permitted.)
The light in cells was always "rationed," so to speak, in both the thirties and the forties: the
"muzzles" on the windows and the frosted reinforced glass created a perma- nent twilight in the cells
(darkness is an important factor in causing depression). They often stretched netting above the
window "muzzle," and in the winter it was covered with snow, which cut off this last access to the
light. Reading became no more than a way of ruining one's eyes. In the Vladimir TON, they made up
for this lack of light at night: bright electric lights burned all night long, preventing sleep. And in the
Dmitrovsk Prison in 1938 (N. A. Kozyrev), there was light in the evenings and at night — a kerosene
lamp on a little shelf way up near the ceiling, that burned away and smoked up the last air; in 1939
there were electric lights that glowed red at half-voltage. Air was "rationed" too. The hinged panes
for ventilation were kept locked, and opened only during the interval of the prisoners' trip to the
toilet, as prisoners recall from both Dmitrovsk and Yaroslavl prisons. (Y. Ginzburg: The bread grew
moldy between morning and lunchtime; the sheets were damp, and the walls green.) In Vladimir in
1948 there was no lack of air, because the transom was open permanently. Walks outdoors ranged
from fifteen to forty-five minutes at various hours in various prisons.

There was no such thing as the communication with the soil that had existed in Schliisselburg or
Solovki; everything that grew had been torn up by the roots, trampled, covered with concrete and
asphalt. They even forbade lifting up one's head to the heavens during the walks: "Look at your
feet!" This was the command both Kozyrev and Adamova remember from the Kazan Prison. Visits
from relatives were forbidden in 1937 and never renewed. Letters could be sent to close relatives
twice a month and could be received from them in most years. (But in Kazan they had to be returned
to the administration the day after they had been read.) Access to the commissary to make purchases
with the money sent in specifically limited amounts was usually permitted. Furniture was no
unimportant part of the prison regimen. Adamova wrote eloquently of her happiness at finding a
simple wooden cot with a straw mattress and a simple wooden table in her cell in Suzdal, after
having had only cots that folded into the wall and chairs anchored to the floor. In the Vladimir TON,
I. Komeyev experienced two different prison regimens:

Under one, in 1947-1948, personal articles were not removed from the cell; one could lie down
during the day; and the turnkey very seldom looked through the peephole. But under the other, in

1949-1953, the cell was locked with two locks (the respon- sibility of the turnkey and duty officer
respectively); one was for- bidden to lie down, forbidden to talk in a normal voice (in Kazan, only in
a whisper) ; personal articles were all taken away; a uniform of striped mattress ticking was issued;
correspondence was permitted only twice a year and only on those days announced without warning
by the chief of the prison (anyone who missed that day couldn't write), and only a sheet of paper half
the size of a postal sheet could be used; violent searches and unscheduled visits were frequent,
requiring the complete turning out of one's belongings and undressing down to one's skin.



Communication between cells was prohibited to such an extent that the jailers went through the
toilets with a portable lantern after each toilet visit and searched in each hole. The entire cell would
get punish- ment cells for graffiti in the toilets. The punishment cells were a scourge in the Special
Purpose Prisons. One could get into a punishment cell for coughing. ("Cover your head with your
blanket. Then you can cough!") Or for walking around the cell (Kozyrev: "It was considered to be
rebellious"); for the noise made by one's shoes. (In the Kazan Prison women had been issued men's
shoes that were much too large for women's feet — size IQV2.) Incidentally, Ginzburg was correct in
concluding that periods in a punishment cell were meted out not for any particular misdemeanor but
according to a schedule: every pri- soner was required to spend some time there in order to learn
what it was like. And the rules included another generally appli- cable point: "In the event of any
display of unruliness in a punish- ment cell [?], the chief of the prison has the right to extend the
term of incarceration there to twenty days. " Just what was meant by unruliness? Here's what
happened to Kozyrev. (The descrip- tions of the punishment cell and much else in the prison regimen
tally to such an extent among all sources that the stamp of a single system of administrative rules can
be detected.) He was given another five days in the punishment cell for pacing back and forth. In the
autumn, the building containing the punishment cells was unheated, and it was very cold. They
forced prisoners to undress down to their underwear and to take off their shoes. The floor was bare
earth and dust (it might be wet dirt; and in the Kazan Prison it might even be covered with water).
Kozyrev had a stool in his. (Ginzburg had none in hers.) He immediately concluded that he would
perish, that he would freeze to death.

But some kind of mysterious inner warmth gradually made itself felt, and it was his salvation. He
learned to sleep sitting on his stool. They gave him a mug of hot water three times a day; it made him
drunk. One of the duty officers, in violation of the rules, pressed a piece of sugar into his ten-and-a-
half-ounce bread ration. On the basis of the rations issued him, and by observing the light from some
faraway, tiny, labyrinthine window, Kozyrev kept count of the days. His five days had come to an
end, but he had not been released. His sense of hearing had be- come extremely acute and he heard
whispers in the corridor — having to do with either "the sixth" or "six days." This was a provocation:
they were waiting for him to say that his five days were over and that it was time to let him out. That
would have constituted unruliness, for which his stay in the punishment cell would have been
prolonged. But he sat silent and obedient for another day, and then they let him out, just as if
everything had been the way it was supposed to be. (Perhaps the chief of the prison used this method
for testing all the prisoners in turn for submissiveness? And then he could sentence all those who
weren't yet submissive enough to further terms in the punishment cell.) After the punishment cell the
ordinary cell seemed like a palace. Kozyrev became deaf for half a year, and he began to get
abscesses in his throat. His cellmate went insane from frequent imprisonment in the punishment cell,
and Kozyrev was kept locked up with an insane man for more than a year, with just the two of them
there. (Nadezhda Surovtseva recalls many cases of insanity in political isolators — she herself recalls
as many as Novorussky totaled up in the whole chronicle of Schliisselburg. )

Does it not at this point seem to the reader that we have gradually, step by step, mounted to the very
point, the peak, of the second horn — and that it is probably really higher than the first? And probably
sharper too?

But opinions are divided. With one voice the old camp veterans consider the Vladimir TON of the
fifties a resort. That is how Vladimir Borisovich Zeldovich, sent there from Abez Station, regarded
it, and Anna Petrovna Skripnikova, who was sent there in 1956 from the Kemerovo camps.
Skripnikova was particularly astonished at the regular dispatch, every ten days, of petitions and
declarations (she even began to write, believe it or not, to the United Nations) and by the excellent
Ubrary, including books in foreign languages: they used to bring the complete catalogue to the cell
and you made out a list for a whole year ahead.

It is also necessary to keep in mind how elastic our law is: thousands of women ("wives") were
sentenced to prison, to tyurzak. And then one fine day someone whistled — and they were transferred



to camps. (The Kolyma hadn't fulfilled the gold plan.) And so they switched them, without any trial
or any court.

In fact, does tyurzak actually exist at all, or is it only the vestibule for the camps?

And only here, right here, is where our chapter ought to have begun. It ought to have examined that
glimmering light which, in time, the soul of the lonely prisoner begins to emit, like the halo of a
saint. Tom from the hustle-bustle of everyday life in so absolute a degree that even counting the
passing minutes puts him intimately in touch with the Universe, the lonely prisoner has to have been
purged of every imperfection, of everything that has stirred and troubled him in his former life, that
has prevented his muddied waters from settling into transparency. How grate- fully his fingers reach
out to feel and crumble the lumps of earth in the vegetable garden (but, alas, it is all asphalt). How
his head rises of itself toward the Eternal Heavens (but, alas, this is forbidden). And how much
touching attention the little bird on the window sill arouses in him (but, alas, there is that "muzzle"
there, and the netting as well, and the hinged ventilation pane is locked). And what clear thoughts,
what sometimes surprising conclusions, he writes down on the paper issued him (but, alas, only if
you buy it in the commissary, and only if you turn it in to the prison office when you have used it
up — for eternal safe- keeping . . .).

But our peevish qualifications somehow interrupt our line of thought. The plan of our chapter creaks

and cracks, and we no longer know the answer to the question: Is the soul of a person in the New
Type Prison, in the Special Purpose Prison (the TON), purified or does it perish once and for all?

If the first thing you see each and every morning is the eyes of your cellmate who has gone insane,
how then shall you save yourself during the coming day? Nikolai Aleksandrovich Kozyrev, whose
brilliant career in astronomy was interrupted by his arrest, saved himself only by thinking of the
eternal and in- finite: of the order of the Universe — and of its Supreme Spirit; of the stars; of their
internal state; and what Time and the pass- ing of Time really are.

And in this way he began to discover a new field in physics. And only in this way did he succeed in
surviving in the Dmi- trovsk Prison. But his line of mental exploration was blocked by forgotten
figures. He could not build any further — he had to have a lot of figures. Now just where could he get
them in his solitary- confinement cell with its overnight kerosene lamp, a cell into which not even a
little bird could enter? And the scientist prayed: "Please, God! I have done everything I could. Please
help me! Please help me continue!"

At this time he was entitled to receive one book every ten days (by then he was alone in the cell). In
the meager prison library were several different editions of Demyan Bedny's Red Concert, which
kept coming around to each cell again and again. Half an hour passed after his prayer; they came to
ex- change his book; and as usual, without asking anything at all, they pushed a book at him. It was
entitled A Course in Astro- physics! Where had it come from? He simply could not imagine such a
book in the prison library. Aware of the brief duration of this coincidence, Kozyrev threw himself on
it and began to mem- orize everything he needed immediately, and everything he might need later
on. In all, just two days had passed, and he had eight days left in which to keep his book, when there
was an unscheduled inspection by the chief of the prison. His eagle eye noticed immediately. "But
you are an astronomer?" "Yes." "Take this book away from him!" But its mystical arrival had
opened the way for his further work, which he then continued in the camp in Norilsk.

And so now we should begin the chapter on the conflict be- tween the soul and the bars.

But what is this? The jailer's key is rattling brazenly in the lock. The gloomy block superintendent is
there with a long list. "Last name, first name, patronymic? Date of birth? Article of the Code? Term?
End of term? Get your things together. Be quick about it!"



Well, brothers, a prisoner transport! A prisoner transport! We're off to somewhere! Good Lord, bless
us! Shall we gather up our bones?

Well, here's what: If we are still alive, then we'll finish this story another time. In Part IV. If we are
still alive . . .

END OF PART I



Chapter 1
The Ships
of the Archipelago

Scattered from the Bering Strait almost to the Bosporus are thousands of islands of the spellbound
Archipelago. They are invisible, but they exist. And the invisible slaves of the Archipel- ago, who
have substance, weight, and volume, have to be trans- ported from island to island just as invisibly
and uninterruptedly.

And by what means are they to be transported? On what?

Great ports exist for this purpose — ^transit prisons; and smaller ports — camp transit points. Sealed
steel ships also exist: railroad cars especially christened zak cars ("prisoner cars"). And out at the
anchorages, they are met by similarly sealed, versatile Black Marias rather than by sloops and
cutters. The zak cars move along on regular schedules. And, whenever necessary, whole caravans —
trains of red cattle cars — are sent from port to port along the routes of the Archipelago.

All this is a thoroughly developed system! It was created over dozens of years — not hastily. Well-
fed, uniformed, unhurried people created it. The Kineshma convoy waits at the Moscow Northern
Station at 1700 hours on odd-numbered days to accept Black Marias from the Butyrki, Krasnaya
Presnya, and Taganka prisons. The Ivanovo convoy has to arrive at the station at 0600 hours on
even-numbered days to receive and hold in custody transit prisoners for Nerekhta, Bezhetsk, and
Bologoye.

All this is happening right next to you, you can almost touch it, but it's invisible (and you can shut
your eyes to it too). At the big stations the loading and unloading of the dirty faces takes place far,
far from the passenger platform and is seen only by switchmen and roadbed inspectors. At smaller
stations a blind alleyway between two warehouses is preferred, into which the Black Marias can
back so that their steps are flush with the steps of the zak car. The convict doesn't have time to look
at the station, to see you, or to look up and down the train. He gets to look only at the steps. (And
sometimes the lower step is waist- high, and he hasn't the strength to climb up on it.) And the con-
voy guards, who have blocked off the narrow crossing from the Black Maria to the zak car, growl
and snarl: "Quick, quick! Come on, come on!" And maybe even brandish their bayonets.

And you, hurrying along the platform with your children, your suitcases, and your string bags, are
too busy to look closely: Why is that second baggage car hitched onto the train? There is no
identification on it, and it is very much like a baggage car — and the gratings have diagonal bars, and
there is darkness behind them. But then why are soldiers, defenders of the Father- land, riding in it,
and why, when the train stops, do two of them march whistling along on either side and peer down
under the car?

The train starts — and a hundred crowded prisoner destinies, tormented hearts, are borne along the
same snaky rails, behind the same smoke, past the same fields, posts, and haystacks as you, and even
a few seconds sooner than you. But outside your window even less trace of the grief which has
flashed past is left in the air than fingers leave in water. And in the famiUar life of the train, which is
always exactly the same — with its slit- openable package of bed linen, and tea served in glasses with
metal holders — could you possibly grasp what a dark and sup- pressed horror has been borne
through the same sector of Euclidean space just three seconds ahead of you? You are dis- satisfied
because there are four of you in your compartment and it is crowded. And could you possibly
believe — and will you possibly believe when reading these lines — that in the same size compartment
as yours, but up ahead in that zak car, there are fourteen people? And if there are twenty-five? And if
there are thirty?



The zak car — what a foul abbreviation it is! As, for that matter, are all the executioners'
abbreviations. They meant to indicate that this a railroad car for prisoners — for zaklyuchennye.
But nowhere, except in prison documents, has this term caught on and stuck. The prisoners got used
to calling this kind of rail- road car a Stolypin car, or, more simply, just a Stolypin.

As rail travel was introduced more widely in our Fatherland, prisoner transports changed their form.
Right up to the nineties of the last century the Siberian prisoner transports moved on foot or by horse
cart. As far back as 1896, Lenin traveled to Siberian exile in an ordinary third-class passenger car
(with free people all around him) and shouted to the train crew that it was intolerably crowded. The
painting by Yaroshenko which everyone knows, Life Is Everywhere, shows a fourth-class pas-
senger car re-equipped in very naive fashion for prisoner trans- port: everything has been left just as
it was, and the prisoners are traveling just like ordinary people, except that double grat- ings have
been installed on the windows. Cars of this type were used on Russian railroads for a very long time.
And certain people remember being transported as prisoners in just such cars in 1927, except that the
men and women were separated. On the other hand, the SR Trushin recalls that even during Tsarist
times he was transported as a prisoner in a "Stolypin" car, except that — once again going back to
legendary times — there were six people in a compartment.

Probably this type of railroad car really was first used under Stolypin, in other words before 1911.
And in the general Cadet revolutionary embitterment, they christened it with his name. However, it
really became the favorite means of prisoner transport only in the twenties; and it became the
universal and exclusive means only from 1930 on, when everything in our life became uniform.
Therefore it would be more correct to call it a Stalin car rather than a Stolypin car. But we aren't
going to argue with the Russian language here.

The Stolypin car is an ordinary passenger car divided into compartments, except that five of the nine
compartments are allotted to the prisoners (here, as everywhere in the Archipelago, half of
everything goes to the auxiliary personnel, the guards), and compartments are separated from the
corridor not by a solid barrier but by a grating which leaves them open for inspection. This grating
consists of intersecting diagonal bars, like the kind one sees in station parks. It rises the full height of
the car, and because of it there are not the usual baggage racks projecting from the compartments
over the corridor. The windows on the cor- ridor sides are ordinary windows, but they have the same
diagonal gratings on the outside. There are no windows in the prisoners' compartments — only tiny,
barred blinds on the level of the second sleeping shelves. That's why the car has no exterior win-
dows and looks like a baggage car. The door into each compart- ment is a sliding door: an iron frame
with bars.

From the corridor side all this is very reminiscent of a me- nagerie: pitiful creatures resembling
human beings are huddled there in cages, the floors and bunks surrounded on all sides by metal
grilles, looking out at you pitifully, begging for something to eat and drink. Except that in
menageries they never crowd the wild animals in so tightly.

According to the calculations of nonprisoner engineers, six people can sit on the bottom bunks of a
Stolypin compartment, and another three can lie on the middle ones (which are joined in one
continuous bunk, except for the space cut out beside the door for climbing up and getting down), and
two more can lie on the baggage shelves above. Now if, in addition to these eleven, eleven more are
pushed into the compartment (the last of whom are shoved out of the way of the door by the jailers'
boots as they shut it), then this will constitute a normal complement for a Stolypin prisoners'
compartment. Two huddle, half-sitting, on each of the upper baggage shelves; another five lie on the
joined middle level (and they are the lucky ones — these places are won in battle, and if there are any
prisoners present from the under- world companionship of thieves — the blatnye — then it is they who
are lying there); and this leaves thirteen down below: five sit on each of the bunks and three are in
the aisle between their legs. Somewhere, mixed up with the people, on the people and under the
people, are their belongings. And that is how they sit, their crossed legs wedged beneath them, day



after day.



No, it isn't done especially to torture people. A sentenced prisoner is a laboring soldier of socialism,
so why should he be tortured? They need him for construction work. But, after all, you will agree he
is not off on a jaunt to visit his mother-in-law, and there is no reason in the world to treat him so well
that people out in freedom would envy him. We have problems with our transportation: he'll get
there all right, and he won't die on the way either.

Since the fifties, when railroad timetables were actually straightened out, the prisoners haven't had to
travel in this fashion for very long at a time — say, a day and a half or two days. During and after the
war, things were worse. From Petropavlovsk (in Kazakhstan) to Karaganda, a Stolypin car might be
seven days en route (with twenty-five people in a compartment). From Karaganda to Sverdlovsk it
could be eight days (with up to twenty- six in a compartment). Even just going from Kuibyshev to
Chel- yabinsk in August, 1945, Susi traveled in a Stolypin car for several days, and their
compartment held thirty-five people lying on top of one another, floundering, fighting.

[Does this perhaps satisfy those who are astonished and reproachful be- cause people didn't fight?]

And in the autumn of 1946 N. V. Timofeyev-Ressovsky traveled from Petropavlovsk to Moscow in
a compartment that had thirty-six people in it! For several days he hung suspended between other
human beings and his legs did not touch the floor. Then they started to die off — and the guards
hauled the corpses out from under their feet. (Not right away, true; only on the second day.) That
way things became less crowded. The whole trip to Moscow continued in this fashion for three
weeks.

[When he got to Moscow, a miracle took place in accordance with the laws of the country of
miracles. Officers carried Timofeyev-Ressovsky from the prisoner transport in their arms, and he
was driven away in an ordinary automobile: he was off to advance science!]

Was thirty-six the upper limit for a Stolypin compartment? I have no evidence available on thirty-
seven or higher, and yet, adhering to our one-and-only scientific method, and remembering the
necessity to struggle against "the limiters," we are compelled to reply: No, no, no! It is not a limit!
Perhaps in some other country it would be an upper limit, but not here! As long as there are any
cubic centimeters of unbreathed air left in the compart- ment, even if it be beneath the upper shelves,
even if between shoulders, legs, and heads, the compartment is ready to take ad- ditional prisoners.
One might, however, conditionally accept as the upper limit the number of unremoved corpses which
can be contained in the total volume of the compartment, given the possibility of packing them in at
leisure.

V. A. Komeyeva traveled from Moscow in a compartment that held thirty women — most of them
withered old women, exiled for their religious beliefs (on arrival all these women, except two, were
immediately put in the hospital). Nobody died in the com- partment because several of the prisoners
were young, well-devel- oped, good-looking girls, arrested "for going out with foreigners." These
girls took it upon themselves to shame the convoy: "You ought to be ashamed to transport them this
way! These are your own mothers!" It probably wasn't so much their moral argument as their
attractive appearance which produced a reaction in the convoy guards, and they did move several of
the old women out — to the punishment cell. But the punishment cell in a Stolypin car is no
punishment; it is a blessing. Of five prisoner compart- ments, four are used as general cells, and the
fifth is set aside and divided in two halves — two narrow half-compartments with one lower and one
upper berth, like those the conductors have. These punishment cells serve to isolate prisoners; three
or four travel in them at a time, and this gives both comfort and space.

No, it is not intentionally to torture them with thirst that the exhausted and overcrowded prisoners
are fed not soup but salt herring or dry smoked Caspian carp for the whole of their trip in the



Stolypin car. (This was exactly how it was in all the years, the thirties and the fifties, winter and
summer, in Siberia and the Ukraine, and it isn't even necessary to cite examples.) It was not to
torture them with thirst — but just you tell me what these raga- muffins were to be fed anyway while
being moved around. They were not supposed to get hot meals in prisoner-transport railroad cars.
(True, there was a kitchen in one of the Stolypin car com- partments, but that was only for the
convoy.) You couldn't just give the prisoners raw grits, and you couldn't give them raw cod- fish
either, nor could you give them canned meat because they might stuff themselves. Herring was just
the thing, with a piece of bread — and what else did they need?

Go ahead, take your half a herring while they are handing it out, and be glad you got it. If you're
smart, you aren't going to eat that herring; just be patient, wait, hide it in your pocket, and you can
eat it at the next transit point where there is water to be had. It's worse when they issue you wet Sea
of Azov anchovies, covered with coarse salt. You can't keep them in your pocket; so scoop them up
in the flaps of your pea jacket, or in your handker- chief, in the palm of your hand — and eat them.
They divide up these Azov anchovies on somebody's pea jacket, whereas the convoy guards dump
the dried carp right on the floor of the com- partment, and it is divided up on the benches, on the
prisoners' knees.

[P. F. Yakubovich (V Mire Otverzhennykh {In the World of the Outcasts), Vol. 1, Moscow, 1964),
writing about the nineties of the last century, recounts that in those terrible years they gave out ten-
kopecks-a-day mess money per person in Siberian prisoner transports, when the price of a loaf of
wheat bread (weighing ten and a half ounces?) was five kopecks; a pot of milk (two quarts?) three
kopecks. "The prisoners were simply in clover," he writes. But then in Irkutsk Province the prices
were higher. A pound of meat cost ten kopecks there and the "prisoners were simply famished!" One
pound of, meat per day per person — it's not half a herring, is it?]

But once they've given you a fish, they aren't going to hold back on the bread, and maybe they'll
even throw in a bit of sugar. Things are much worse when the convoy comes over and announces:
"We aren't going to be feeding you today; nothing was issued for you." And it could very well be
that nothing was actually issued: someone in one or another prison accounting office made a mistake
in the figures. And it could also be that it was issued but that the convoy was short on rations — after
all, they aren't exactly overfed either — and so they decided to snag a bit of your bread for
themselves; and in that case to hand over half a herring by itself would seem suspicious.

And, of course, it is not for the purpose of intentionally tortur- ing the prisoner that after his herring
he is given neither hot water (and he never gets that here in any case) nor even plain, unboiled water.
One has to understand the situation: The convoy staff is limited; some of them have to be on watch
in the corridor; some are on duty on the platform; at the stations they clamber all over the car, under
it, on top of it, to make sure that there aren't any holes in it. Others are kept busy cleaning guns, and
then, of course, there has to be time for political indoctrination and their cate- chism on the articles
of war. And the third shift is sleeping. They insist on their full eight hours — for, after all, the war is
over. And then, to go carry water in pails — it has to be hauled a long way, too, and it's insulting: why
should a Soviet soldier have to carry water like a donkey for enemies of the people? And there are
also times when they spend half a day hauling the Stolypin cars way out from the station in order to
reshuffle or recouple the cars (it will be farther away from prying eyes), and the result is that you
can't get water even for your own Red Army mess. True, there is one way out. You can go dip up
some water from the locomotive tender. It's yellow and murky, with some lubricat- ing grease mixed
in with it. But the zeks will drink it willingly. It doesn't really matter that much anyway, since it isn't
as if they could see what they are drinking in the semidarkness of their compartment. They don't
have their own window, and there isn't any light bulb there either, and what light they get comes
from the corridor. And there's another thing too: it takes a long time to dole out that water. The zeks
don't have their own mugs. Who- ever did have one has had it taken away from him — so what it adds
up to is that they have to be given the two government issue mugs to drink out of, and while they are
drinking up you have to keep standing there and standing, and dipping it out and dipping it out some



more and handing it to them. (Yes, and then, too, the prisoners argue about who's to drink first; they
want the healthy prisoners to drink first, and only then those with tuberculosis, and last of all those
with syphilis! Just as if it wasn't going to begin all over again in the next cell: first the healthy ones .
..)

But the convoy could have borne with all that, hauled the water, and doled it out, if only those pigs,
after slurping up the water, didn't ask to go to the toilet. So here's the way it all works out: if you
don't give them water for a day, then they don't ask to go to the toilet. Give them water once, and
they go to the toilet once; take pity on them and give them water twice — and they go to the toilet
twice. So it's pure and simple common sense: just don't give them anything to drink.

And it isn't that one is stingy about taking them to the toilet because one wants to be stingy about the
use of the toilet itself, but because taking prisoners to the toilet is a responsible — even, one might
say, a combat — operation: it takes a long, long time for one private first class and two privates. Two
guards have to be stationed, one next to the toilet door, the other in the corridor on the opposite side
(so that no one tries to escape in that direc- tion), while the private first class has to push open and
then shut the door to the compartment, first to admit the returning prisoner, and then to allow the
next one out. The statutes permit letting out only one at a time, so that they don't try to escape and so
that they can't start a rebellion. Therefore, the way it works out is that the one prisoner who has been
let out to go to the toilet is holding up 30 others in his own compartment and 120 in the whole car,
not to mention the convoy detail! And so the command resounds: "Come on there, come on! Get a
move on, get a move on!" The private first class and the soldiers keep hurrying him all the way there
and back and he hurries so fast that he stumbles, and it's as though they think he is going to steal that
shithole from the state. (In 1949, traveling in a Stolypin car between Moscow and Kuibyshev, the
one-legged German Schultz, having understood the Russian hurry-up by this time, jumped to the
toilet and back on his one leg while the convoy kept laughing and ordering him to go faster. During
one such trip, one of the convoy guards pushed him when he reached the platform at the end of the
corridor, and Schultz fell down on the floor in front of the toilet. The convoy guard went into a rage
and began to beat him, while Schultz, who couldn't get up because of the blows raining down on
him, crawled and crept into the dirty toilet. The rest of the convoy roared with laughter.)

[This, it seems, is what is meant by the phrase "Stalin's cult of person- ality"?]

So that the prisoner shouldn't attempt to escape during the moment he was in the toilet, and also for a
faster turnaround, the door to the toilet was not closed, and the convoy guard, watch- ing the process
from the platform of the car, could encourage it: "Come on, come on now! That's plenty, that's
enough for you!" Sometimes the orders came before you even started: "All right, number one only!"
And that meant that from the platform they'd prevent your doing anything else. And then, of course,
you couldn't wash your hands. There was never enough water in the tank there, and there wasn't
enough time either. If the prisoner even so much as touched the plunger of the washstand, the con-
voy guard would roar: "Don't you touch that, move along." (And if someone happened to have soap
or a towel among his belong- ings, he wouldn't dare take it out anyway, simply out of shame: that
would really be acting like a sucker.) The toilet was filthy. Quicker, quicker! And tracking back the
liquid mess on his shoes, the prisoner would be shoved back into the compartment, where he would
climb up over somebody's arms and shoulders, and then, from the top row, his dirty shoes would
dangle to the middle row and drip.

When women were taken to the toilet, the statutes of the con- voy service, and common sense as
well, required that the toilet door be kept open, but not every convoy insisted on this and some
allowed the door to be shut: Oh, all right, go ahead and shut it. (Later on one of the women was sent
in to wash out the toilet, and the guard again had to stand right there beside her so that she didn't try
to escape.)

And even at this fast tempo, visits to the toilet for 120 people would take more than two hours —



more than a quarter of the entire shift for three convoy guards! And in spite of that, you still couldn't
make them happy. In spite of that, some old sandpiper or other would begin to cry half an hour later
and ask to go to the toilet, and, of course, he wouldn't be allowed to go, and then he would soil
himself right there in the compartment, and once again that meant trouble for the private first class:
the prisoner had to be forced to pick it up in his hands and carry it away.

So that was all there was to it: fewer trips to the toilet! And that meant less water, and less food
too — because then they wouldn't complain of loose bowels and stink up the air; after all, how bad
could it be? A man couldn't even breathe.

Less water! But they had to hand out the herring anyway, just as the regulations required! No
water — that was a reasonable measure. No herring — that was a service crime.

No one, no one at all, ever set out to torture us on purpose! The convoy's actions were quite
reasonable! But, like the ancient Christians, we sat there in the cage while they poured salt on our
raw and bleeding tongues.

Also the prisoner-transport convoys did not often deliberately (though sometimes they did) mix the
thieves — blatari — and non- political offenders in with Article 58 politicals in the same com-
partment. But a particular situation existed: There were a great many prisoners and very few railroad
cars and compartments, and time was always short, and so when was there time enough to sort them
out? One of the four compartments was kept for women, and if the prisoners in the other three were
to be sorted out on one basis or another, the most logical basis would be by destination so that it
would be easier to unload them.

After all, was it because Pontius Pilate wanted to humiliate him that Christ was crucified between
two thieves? It just hap- pened to be crucifixion day that day — and there was only one Golgotha, and
time was short. And so he was numbered with the transgressors.

I am afraid even to think what I would have had to suffer if I had been in the position of a common
convict. . . . The convoy and the transport officers dealt with me and my comrades with cautious
politeness. . . . Being a political, I went to hard labor in relative comfort — on the transports, I had
quarters separate from the criminal prisoners, and my pood — my thirty-six pounds — of baggage was
moved about on a cart. . . .

...I left out the quotation marks around the above paragraph to enable the reader to understand things
a little better. After all, quotation marks are always used either for irony or to set some- thing apart.
And without quotation marks the paragraph sounds wild, does it not?

It was written by P. F. Yakubovich about the nineties of the last century. His book was recently
republished as a sermon on that dark and dismal age. We learn from it that even on a barge the
political prisoners had special quarters and a special section set aside for their walks on deck. (The
same thing appears in Tol- stoi's Resurrection, in which, furthermore, an outsider. Prince
Nekhlyudov, is allowed to visit the political prisoners in order to interview them.) And it was only
because the "magic word 'politi- caF had been left out by mistake" opposite Yakubovich's name on
the list (his own words) that he was met at Ust-Kara "by the hard-labor inspector . . . like an ordinary
criminal prisoner — rudely, provocatively, impudently." However, this misunderstand- ing was all
happily cleared up.

What an unbelievable time! It was almost a crime to mix politi- cals with criminals! Criminals were
teamed up and driven along the streets to the station so as to expose them to public disgrace. And
politicals could go there in carriages. (Olminsky, in 1899.) Politicals were not fed from the common
pot but were given a food allowance instead and had their meals brought from public eating houses.
The Bolshevik Olminsky didn't want even the hospital rations because he found the food too coarse.



[ Because of all of this the ordinary criminal mob christened the profes- sional revolutionaries
"mangy swells." (P. F. Yakubovich.)]

The Butyrki Prison superintendent apologized to Olminsky for the jailer's having addressed him too
familiarly: You see, we seldom get politicals here, and the jailer didn't know any better!

Seldom get politicals in the Butyrki? What kind of dream is this? Then where were they? The
Lubyanka didn't exist as a prison at the time, and neither did Lefortovo!

The writer Radishchev was taken to the prisoner transport in shackles, and when the weather got
cold they threw over him a "repulsive, raw sheepskin coat," which they had taken from a watchman.
However, the Empress Catherine immediately issued orders that his shackles be removed and that he
be provided with everything he required for his journey. But in November, 1927, Anna Skripnikova
was sent on a transport from the Butyrki to the Solovetsky Islands in a straw hat and a summer dress.
(That was what she had been wearing when she was arrested in the summer, and since that time her
room had been sealed and no one was willing to give her permission to get her winter things out of
it.)

To draw a distinction between political prisoners and common criminals is the equivalent of showing
them respect as equal op- ponents, of recognizing that people may have views of their own. Thus a
political prisoner is conscious of political /reeJom even when under arrest.

But since the time when we all became KR's and the socialists failed to retain their status as
politicals, since then any protest that as a political you ought not to be mixed up with ordinary
criminals has resulted only in laughter on the prisoners' part and bewilderment on the part of the
jailers. "All are criminals here," the jailers reply — sincerely.

This mingling, this first devastating encounter, takes place either in the Black Maria or in the
Stolypin car. Up to this moment, no matter how they have oppressed, tortured, and tor- mented you
during the interrogation, it has all originated with the bluecaps, and you have never confused them
with human beings but have seen in them merely an insolent branch of the service. But at the same
time, even if your cellmates have been totally different from you in development and experience, and
even if you have quarreled with them, and even if they have squealed on you, they have all belonged
to that same ordinary, sinful, every- day humanity among which you have spent your whole life.

When you were jammed into a Stolypin compartment, you expected that here, too, you would
encounter only colleagues in misfortune. All your enemies and oppressors remained on the other
side of the bars, and you certainly did not expect to find them on this side. And suddenly you lift
your eyes to the square recess in the middle bunk, to that one and only heaven above you, and up
there you see three or four — oh, no, not faces! They aren't monkey muzzles either, because monkeys'
muzzles are much, much decenter and more thoughtful! No, and they aren't simply hideous
countenances, since there must be something human even in them. You see cruel, loathsome snouts
up there, wearing expressions of greed and mockery. Each of them looks at you like a spider gloating
over a fly. Their web is that grating which imprisons you — and you have been had! They squinch up
their lips, as if they intend to bite you from one side. They hiss when they speak, enjoying that
hissing more than the vowel and consonant sounds of speech — and the only thing about their speech
that resembles the Russian language is the endings of verbs and nouns. It is gibberish.

Those strange gorilloids were usually dressed in sleeveless undershirts. After all, it is stuffy in the
Stolypin car. Their sinewy purple necks, their swelUng shoulder muscles, their swarthy tattooed
chests have never suffered prison emaciation. Who are they? Where do they come from? And
suddenly you see a small cross dangling from one of those necks. Yes, a little aluminum cross on a
string. You are surprised and slightly relieved. That means there are religious believers among them.
How touching! So nothing terrible is going to happen. But immediately this "be- liever" belies both



his cross and his faith by cursing (and they curse partly in Russian), and he jabs two protruding
fingers, spread into the "V" of a slingshot, right in your eyes — not even pausing to threaten you but
starting to punch them out then and there. And this gesture of theirs, which says, "I'll gouge out your
eyes, crowbait!" covers their entire philosophy and faith! If they are capable of crushing your
eyeballs like worms, what is there on you or belonging to you that they'll spare? The little cross
dangles there and your still unsquashed eyes watch this wildest of masquerades, and your whole
system of reckoning goes awry: Which of you is already crazy? And who is about to go insane?

In one moment, all the customs and habits of human inter- course you have lived with all your life
have broken down. In your entire previous life, particularly before your arrest but even to some
degree afterward, even to some degree during interroga- tion, too, you spoke words to other people
and they answered you in words. And those words produced actions. One might per- suade, or
refuse, or come to an agreement. You recall various human relationships — a request, an order, an
expression of grati- tude. But what has overtaken you here is beyond all these words and beyond all
these relationships. An emissary of the ugly snout descends, most often a vicious boy whose
impudence and rude- ness are thrice despicable, and this little demon unties your bag and rifles your
pockets — not tentatively, but treating them like his very own. From that moment, nothing that
belongs to you is yours any longer. And all you yourself are is a rubber dummy around which
superfluous things are wrapped which can easily be taken off. Nor can you explain anything in
words, nor deny, nor prohibit, nor plead with that evil little skunk or those foul snouts up above.
They are not people. This has become clear to you in one moment. The only thing to be done with
them is to beat them, to beat them without wasting any time flapping your tongue. Either that
juvenile there or those bigger vermin up above.

But how can you hit those three up top from down below? And the kid there, even though he's a
stinking polecat, well, it doesn't seem right to hit him either. Maybe you can push him away soft
Uke? No, you can't even do that, because he'll bite your nose right off, or else they'll break your head
from above (and they have knives, too, but they aren't going to bother to pull them out and soil them
on you).

You look at your neighbors, your comrades: Let's either resist or protest! But all your comrades, all
your fellow Article 58's, who have been plundered one by one even before you got there, sit there
submissively, hunched over, and they stare right past you, and it's even worse when they look at you
the way they always do look at you, as though no violence were going on at all, no plundering, as
though it were a natural phenomenon, as though it were the grass growing and the rain falling.

And the reason why, gentlemen, comrades, and brothers, is that the proper time was allowed to slip
by! You ought to have got hold of yourselves and remembered who you were back when
Struzhinsky burned himself aUve in his Vyatka cell, and even be- fore that, when you were declared
"counterrevolutionaries. "

And so you allow the thieves to take your overcoat and paw through your jacket and snatch your
twenty rubles from where it was sewn in, and your bag has already been tossed up above and
checked out, and everything your sentimental wife collected for your long trip after you were
sentenced stays up there, and they've thrown the bag back down to you with . . . your tooth- brush.

Although not everyone submitted just like that, 99 percent did in the thirties and forties.

[I have heard of a few cases in which three seasoned, young, and healthy men stood up against the
thieves — not to defend justice in general, but to protect, not those who were being plundered right
next to them, but themselves only. In other words: armed neutrality.]

And how could that be? Men, officers, soldiers, front-line soldiers!



To strike out boldly, a person has to be ready for that battle, waiting for it, and has to understand its
purpose. All these condi- tions were absent here. A person wholly unfamiliar with the thieves' — the
blatnoi — milieu didn't anticipate this battle and, most importantly, failed totally to understand its
vital necessity. Up to this point he had assumed (incorrectly) that his only enemies were the
bluecaps. He needed still more education to arrive at the understanding that the tattooed chests were
merely the rear ends of the bluecaps. This was the revelation the bluecaps never utter aloud: "You
today, me tomorrow." The new prisoner wanted to consider himself a political — in other words, on
the side of the people — while the state was against the people. And at that point he was unexpectedly
assaulted from behind and both sides by quick- fingered devils of some kind, and all the categories
got mixed up, and clarity was shattered into fragments. (And it would take a long time for the
prisoner to put two and two together and figure out that this horde of devils were hand in glove with
the jailers.)

To strike out boldly, a person has to feel that his rear is de- fended, that he has support on both his
flanks, that there is soUd earth beneath his feet. All these conditions were absent for the Article 58's.
Having passed through the meat grinder of political interrogation, the human being was physically
crushed in body: he had been starved, he hadn't slept, he had frozen in punishment cells, he had lain
there a beaten man. But it wasn't only his body. His soul was crushed too. Over and over he had been
told and had had demonstrated to him that his views, and his conduct in life, and his relationships
with people had all been wrong because they had brought him to ruin. All that was left in that
scrunched- up wad the engine room of the law had spewed out into the prisoner transport was a
greed for life, and no understanding whatever. To crush him once and for all and to cut him off from
all others once and for all — that was the function of interrogation under Article 58. The convicted
prisoner had to learn that his worst guilt out in freedom had been his attempt somehow to get
together or unite with others by any route but the Party organizer, the trade-union organizer, or the
administration. In prison this fear went so far as to become fear of all kinds of collective action: two
voices uttering the same complaint or two prisoners signing a complaint on one piece of paper. Gun-
shy now and for a good long time to come of any and every kind of collaboration or unification, the
pseudo politicals were not prepared to unite even against the thieves. Nor would they even think of
bringing along a weapon — a knife or a bludgeon — for the Stolypin car or the transit prison. In the
first place, why have one? And against whom? In the second place, if you did use it, then,
considering the aggravating circumstance of your malevolent Article 58, you might be shot when
you were retried. In the third place, even before that, your punishment for having a knife when they
searched you would be very different from the thief s. For him to have a knife was mere
misbehavior, tradition, he didn't know any better. But for you to have one was "terrorism."

Finally, many of the people imprisoned under Article 58 were peaceful people (very often elderly,
too, and often ill), and they had gotten along all their lives with words and without resorting to
fisticuffs, and they weren't any more prepared for them now than they had been before.

Nor had the thieves ever been put through the same kind of interrogation. Their entire interrogation
had consisted of two sessions, an easy trial, and an easy sentence, and they wouldn't have to serve it
out. They would be released ahead of time: either they would be amnestied or else they would
simply escape.

[V. I. Ivanov (now from Ukhta) got Article 162 (thievery) nine times and Article 82 (escape) five
times, for a total of thirty-seven years in prison — and he "served out" five to six years for all of
them.]

Even during interrogation, no one ever deprived a thief of his legitimate parcels — consisting of
abundant packages from the loot kept by his underworld comrades who were still on the loose. He
never grew thin, was never weak for a single day, and in transit he ate at the expense of the innocent
nonthieves, whom he called, in his own jargon, the frayera — "frayers," or "innocents," or "suckers."



["Prayer" is a blatnoi — underworld — word meaning nonthief — in other words, not a Chelovek
("Human being," with a capital letter). Well, even more simply: the frayera were all nonthief,
nonunderworld mankind.]

Not only did the articles of the Code dealing with thieves and bandits not oppress the thief; he was,
in fact, proud of his con- victions under them. And he was supported in this pride by all the chiefs in
blue shoulder boards and blue piping. "Oh, that's nothing. Even though you're a bandit and a
murderer, you are not a traitor of the Motherland, you are one of our own people; you will reform."
There was no Section Eleven — for organization — in the thieves' articles in the Code. Organization
was not for- bidden the thieves. And why should it be? Let it help develop in them the feelings of
collectivism that people in our society need so badly. And disarming them was just a game. They
weren't punished for having a weapon. Their thieves' law was respected ("They can't be anything but
what they are"). And a new murder in the cell would not increase a murderer's sentence, but instead
would bring him new laurels.

And all that went very deep indeed. In works of the last cen- tury, the lumpenproletariat was

criticized for little more than a certain lack of discipline, for fickleness of mood. And Stalin was
always partial to the thieves — after all, who robbed the banks for him? Back in 1901 his comrades in
the Party and in prison ac- cused him of using common criminals against his political enemies. From
the twenties on, the obliging term "social ally" came to be widely used. That was Makarenko's
contention too: these could be reformed. According to Makarenko, the origin of crime lay solely in
the "counterrevolutionary underground." {Those were the ones who couldn't be reformed —
engineers, priests, SR's, Mensheviks.)

And why shouldn't they steal, if there was no one to put a stop to it? Three or four brazen thieves
working hand in glove could lord it over several dozen frightened and cowed pseudo politicals.

With the approval of the administration. On the basis of the Progressive Doctrine.

But even if they didn't drive off the thieves with their fists, why didn't the victims at least make
complaints? After all, every sound could be heard in the corridor, and a convoy guard was marching
slowly back and forth right out there.

Yes, that is a question! Every sound and every complaining cry can be heard, and the convoy just
keeps marching back and forth — why doesn't he interfere? Just a yard away from him, in the half-
dark cave of the compartment, they are plundering a human being — why doesn't the soldier of the
government police interfere?

For the very same reason: he, too, has been indoctrinated. Even more than that: after many years of
favoring thieves, the convoy has itself slipped in their direction. The convoy has itself become a
thief

From the middle of the thirties until the middle of the forties, during that ten-year period of the
thieves' most flagrant debauches and most intense oppression of the politicals, no one at all can recall
a case in which a convoy guard intervened in the plunder- ing of a political in a cell, in a railroad car,
or in a Black Maria. But they will tell you of innumerable cases in which the convoy accepted stolen
goods from the thieves and, in return, bought them vodka, snacks (sweeter than the rations, too), and
smokes. The examples are so numerous as to be typical.

The convoy sergeant, after all, hasn't anything either: he has his gun, his greatcoat roll, his mess tin,
his soldier's ration. It would be cruel to require him to escort an enemy of the people in an expensive
overcoat or chrome-leather boots or with a swag of luxurious city articles — and to reconcile himself
to that in- equality. Was not taking these things just one additional form of the class struggle, after
all? And what other norms were there?



In 1945-1946, when prisoners streamed in not just from any- where but from Europe, and wore and
had in their bags unheard- of European articles, even the convoy officers could not restrain
themselves. Their service had kept them from the front, but at the end of the war it also kept them
from the harvest of booty — and, I ask you, was that just?

And so, in these circumstances, the convoy guard systemati- cally mixed the thieves and the
politicals in each compartment of their Stolypin, not through lack of space for them elsewhere and
not through haste, but out of greed. And the thieves did not let them down: they stripped the beavers
of everything, and then those possessions migrated into the suitcases of the convoy.

[A beaver in the blatnoi — underworld — jargon was any rich zek who had "trash" — meaning good
clothes — and "bacilli" — meaning fats, sugar, and other goodies.]

But what could be done if the beavers had been loaded into the Stolypin cars, and the train was
moving, and there simply weren't any thieves at all — they simply hadn't put any aboard? What if
they weren't being shipped out on prisoner transports that day, even from one of the stations along
the way? This could and did happen — several such cases are known.

In 1947 they were transporting from Moscow to the Vladimir Central Prison a group of foreigners
who had opulent possessions — as could be seen the very first time their suitcases were opened. At
that point, the convoy jY^e// began a systematic confiscation of their belongings right there in the
railroad car. So that nothing should be missed, the prisoners were forced to undress down to their
bare skin and to sit on the floor of the car near the toilet while their things were examined and taken
away. But the convoy guard failed to take into account that they were taking these prisoners not to a
camp but to a genuine prison. On their arrival there, 1. A. Korneyev handed in a written complaint,
describing exactly what had happened. They found the particular unit of convoy guards and searched
them. Some of the things were recovered and returned to their owners, who also received com-
pensation in money for those that weren't recovered. They say that the convoy guards got from ten to
fifteen years. However, this is something that cannot be checked, and anyway they would have been
convicted under an ordinary nonpolitical article of the Code, and they wouldn't have had to spend a
long time in prison.

However, that was an exceptional case, and if he had managed to restrain his greed in time, the chief
of the convoy would have realized that it was better not to get involved in it. And here is another,
less complicated case, which probably means that it happened often. In August, 1945, in the
Moscow-Novosibirsk Stolypin car (in which A. Susi was being transported), it turned out that there
weren't any thieves. And the trip was a long one, and the Stolypins just crawled along at that time.
Without hurry- ing in the least, all in good time, the convoy chief declared a search — one prisoner at
a time in the corridor with his things. Those summoned were made to undress in accordance with
prison rules, but that wasn't why the search was being conducted, for each prisoner who had been
searched was, in fact, put right back into his own crowded compartment, and any knife, anything for-
bidden, could simply have been passed from hand to hand. The real purpose of the search was to
examine their personal articles — the clothes they were wearing and whatever was in their bags. And
right there, beside the bags, not in the least bored by the whole protracted search, the chief of the
convoy guard, an officer, stood with a haughty poker face, with his assistant, a sergeant, beside him.
Sinful greed kept trying to pop out, but the officer kept it hidden under a pretended indifference. It
was the same situation as an old rake looking over little girls but embarrassed by the presence of
outsiders — yes, and by that of the girls too — and not knowing exactly how to proceed. How badly
he needed just a few thieves! But there were no thieves in the transport.

There were no thieves aboard, but there were individuals among the prisoners who had already been
infected by the thief-laden atmosphere of the prison. After all, the example of thieves is instructive
and calls forth imitations: it demonstrates that there is an easy way to live in prison. Two recent
officers were in one of the compartments — Sanin (from the navy) and Merezhkov. They were both



58's, but their attitudes had already changed. Sanin, with Merezhkov's support, proclaimed himself
the monitor of the compartment and, through a convoy guard, requested a meeting with their chief.
(He had fathomed that haughtiness and its need of a pimp!) This was unheard of, but Sanin was sum-
moned, and they had a chat somewhere. Following Sanin's ex- ample, someone in the second
compartment also asked for a meeting. And that person was similarly received.

And the next morning they issued not twenty ounces of bread — the prisoner-transport ration at the
time — but no more than nine ounces.

They gave out the ration, and a quiet murmur began. A mur- mur, but in fear of any "collective
action," these politicals did not speak up. In the event, only one among them loudly asked the guard
distributing the bread: "Citizen chief! How much does this ration weigh?"

"The correct weight," he was told.

"I demand a reweighing; otherwise I will not accept it!" the dissatisfied prisoner declared loudly.

The whole car fell silent. Many waited before beginning to eat their ration; expecting that theirs, too,
would be reweighed. And at that moment, in all his spotlessness, the officer appeared. Everyone fell
silent, which made his words all the weightier and all the more irresistible.

"Which one here spoke out against the Soviet government?"

All hearts stopped beating. (People will protest that this is a universal approach, that even out in
freedom every little chief declares himself to be the Soviet government, and just try to argue with
him about it. But for those who are panicky, who have just been sentenced for anti-Soviet
propaganda, the threat is more frightening.)

"Who was starting a mutiny over the bread ration?" the officer demanded.

"Citizen lieutenant, I only wanted ..." The guilty rebel was already trying to explain it all away.

"Aha, you're the bastard? You're the one who doesn't like the Soviet government?"

(And why rebel? Why argue? Wasn't it really easier to eat that little underweight ration, to suffer it in
silence? And now he had fallen right in it!)

"You stinking shit! You counterrevolutionary! You ought to be hanged, and you have the nerve to
demand that the bread ration be re weighed! You rat — the Soviet government gives you food and
drink, and you have the brass to be dissatisfied? Do you know what you're going to get for that?"

Orders to the guard: "Take him out!" The lock rattles. "Come on out, you! Hands behind your back!"
They bring out the un- fortunate.

"Now who else is dissatisfied? Who else wants his bread ration reweighed?"

(And it's not as if you could prove anything anyway. It's not as if they'd take your word against the
lieutenant's if you were to complain somewhere that there were only nine ounces instead of twenty.)

It's quite enough to show a well-beaten dog the whip. All the rest turned out to be satisfied, and that
was how the penalty ration was confirmed for all the days of the long journey. And they began to
withhold the sugar too. The convoy had appropriated it.



(And this took place during the summer of our two great vie- tories — over Germany and Japan —
victories which embellish the history of our Fatherland and which our grandsons and great-
grandsons will learn about in school.)

The prisoners went hungry for a day and then a second day, by which time several of them began to
get a bit wiser, and Sanin said to his compartment: "Look, fellows: If we go on this way, we're lost.
Come on now, all of you who have some good stuff with you, let me have it, and I'll trade it for
something to eat." With great self-assurance he accepted some articles and turned down others. (Not
all the prisoners were willing to let their things go — and, you see, no one forced them to either.) And
then he and Merezhkov asked to be allowed to leave the compartment, and, strangely enough, the
convoy let them out. Taking the things, they went off toward the compartment of the convoy guard,
and they returned from there with sliced loaves of bread and with makhorka. These very loaves
constituted the eleven ounces miss- ing from the daily rations. Now, however, they were not dis-
tributed on an equal basis but went only to those who had handed over their belongings.

And that was quite fair: after all, they had all admitted they were satisfied with the reduced bread

ration. It was also fair be- cause the belongings were, after all, worth something, and it was right that
they should be paid for. And it was also fair in the long view because those things were simply too
good for camp and were destined anyway to be taken away or stolen there.

The makhorka had belonged to the guard. The soldiers shared their precious makhorka with the
prisoners. And that was fair, too, since they had eaten the prisoners' bread and drunk up their sugar,
which was too good for enemies anyway. And, last, it was only fair, too, that Sanin and Merezhkov
took the largest share for themselves even though they'd contributed nothing — because without them
all this would not have been arranged.

And so they sat crammed in there, in the semidarkness, and some of them chewed on their neighbors'
chunks of bread and their neighbors sat there and watched them. The guard permitted smoking only
on a collective basis, every two hours — and the whole car was as filled with smoke as if there'd been
a fire. Those who at first had clung to their things now regretted that they hadn't given them to Sanin
and asked him to take them, but Sanin said he'd only take them later on.

This whole operation wouldn't have worked so well and so thoroughly had it not been for the slow
trains and slow Stolypin cars of the immediate postwar years, when they kept unhitching them from
one train and hitching them to another and held them waiting in the stations. And, at the same time,
if it hadn't been the immediate postwar period, neither would there have been those greed-inspiring
belongings. Their train took a week to get to Kuibyshev — and during that entire week they got only
nine ounces of bread a day. (This, to be sure, was twice the ration distributed during the siege of
Leningrad.) And they did get dried Caspian carp and water, in addition. They had to ransom their
remaining bread ration with their personal possessions. And soon the supply of these articles
exceeded the demand, and the convoy guards became very choosy and reluctant to take more things.

They were received at the Kuibyshev Transit Prison, given baths, and returned as a group to that
very same Stolypin. The convoy which took them over was new — but, in passing on the relay baton,
the previous crew had evidently told them how to put the squeeze on, and the very same system of
ransoming their own rations functioned all the way to Novosibirsk. (It is easy to see how this
infectious experiment might have spread rapidly through whole units of the convoy guards.)

And when they were unloaded on the ground between the tracks in Novosibirsk, some new officer
came up and asked them: "Any complaints against the convoy?" And they were all so con- fused that
nobody answered.

The first chief of convoy had calculated accurately — this was Russia!



Another factor which distinguishes Stolypin passengers from the rest of the train is that they do not
know where their train is going and at what station they will disembark: after all, they don't have
tickets, and they don't read the route signs on the cars. In Moscow, they sometimes load them on so
far from the station platform that even the Muscovites among them don't know which of the eight
Moscow stations they are at. For several hours the prisoners sit all squeezed together in the stench
while they wait for a switch- ing engine. And finally it comes and takes the zak car to the al- ready
made-up train. If it is summertime, the station loudspeakers can be heard: "Moscow to Ufa departing
from Track 3. Moscow to Tashkent still loading at Platform 1 ..." That means it's the Kazan Station,
and those who know the geography of the Archipelago are now explaining to their comrades that
Vorkuta and Pechora are out: they leave from the Yaroslavl Station; and the Kirov and Gorky camps
are out too.

[Thus it is that weeds get into the harvest of fame. But are they weeds? After all, there are no
Pushkin, Gogol, or Tolstoi camps — but there are Gorky camps, and what a nest of them too! Yes,
and there is a separate mine "named for Maxim Gorky" (twenty -five miles from Elgen in the
Kolyma)! Yes, Aleksei Maximo vich Gorky . . . "with your heart and your name, comrade ..." If the
enemy does not surrender . . . You say one reckless little word, and look — you're not in literature
any longer.]

They never send people from Moscow to Byelorussia, the Ukraine, or the Caucasus any- way. They

have no room there even for their own. Let's listen some more: the Ufa train has left, and ours hasn't
moved. The Tashkent train has started, and we're still here. "Moscow to Novosibirsk departing. All
those seeing passengers off, disem- bark. . . . All passengers show their tickets. ..." We have started.

Our train! And what does that prove? Nothing so far. The middle Volga area is still open, and the
South Urals. And Kazakhstan with the Dzhezkazgan copper mines. And Taishet, with its factory for
creosoting railroad ties (where, they say, creosote penetrates the skin and bones and its vapors fill the
lungs — and that is death). All Siberia is still open to us — all the way to Sovetskaya Gavan. The
Kolyma too. And Norilsk.

And if it is wintertime, the car is battened down and the loud- speakers are inaudible. If the convoy
guards obey their regula- tions, then you'll hear nary a whisper from them about the route either. And
thus we set out, and, entangled in other bodies, fall asleep to the clacking of the wheels without
knowing whether we will see forest or steppe through the window tomorrow. Through that window
in the corridor. From the middle shelf, through the grating, the corridor, the two windowpanes, and
still another grat- ing, you can still see some switching tracks and a piece of open space hurtling by
the train. If the windowpanes have not frosted over, you can sometimes even read the names of the
stations — some Avsyunino or Undol. Where are these stations? No one in the compartment knows.
Sometimes you can judge from the sun whether you are being taken north or east. Or at some place
called Tufanovo, they might shove some dilapidated nonpolitical offender into your compartment,
and he would tell you he was being taken to Danilov to be tried and was scared he'd get a couple of
years. In this way you would find out that you'd gone through Yaroslavl that night, which meant that
the first transit prison on your route would be Vologda. And some know-it-alls in the compartment
would savor gloomily the famous flourish, stressing all the "o's," of the Vologda guards: "The
Vologda con- voy guards don't joke!"

But even after figuring out the general direction, you still haven't really found out anything: transit
prisons lie in clusters on your route, and you can be shunted off to one side or another from any one
of them. You don't fancy Ukhta, nor Inta, nor Vorkuta. But do you think that Construction Project
501 — a railroad in the tundra, crossing northern Siberia — is any sweeter? It is worse than any of
them.

Five years after the war, when the waves of prisoners had finally settled within the river banks (or
perhaps they had merely expanded the MVD staffs?), the Ministry sorted out the millions of piles of



cases and started sending along with each sentenced prisoner a sealed envelope that contained his
case file and, visible through a slot in the envelope, his route and destination, inserted for the convoy
(and the convoy wasn't supposed to know any- thing more than that — because the contents of the file
might have a corrupting influence). So then, if you were lying on the middle bunk, and the sergeant
stopped right next to you, and you could read upside down, you might be fast enough to read that
some- one was being taken to Knyazh-Pogost and that you were being sent to Kargopol.

So now there would be more worries! What was Kargopol Camp? Who had ever heard of it? What
kind of general-assign- ment work did they have there? (There did exist general-assign- ment work
which was fatal, and some that was not that bad.) Was this a death camp or not?

And then how had you failed to let your family know in the hurry of leaving, and they thought you
were still in the Stalino- gorsk Camp near Tula? If you were very nervous about this and very
inventive, you might succeed in solving that problem too: you might find someone with a piece of
pencil lead half an inch long and a piece of crumpled paper. Making sure the convoy doesn't see you
from the corridor (you are forbidden to lie with your feet toward the corridor; your head has to be in
that direc- tion), hunched over and facing in the opposite direction, you write to your family,
between lurches of the car, that you have suddenly been taken from where you were and are being
sent somewhere else, and you might be able to send only one letter a year from your new destination,
so let them be prepared for this eventuality. You have to fold your letter into a triangle and carry it to
the toilet in the hope of a lucky break: they might just take you there while approaching a station or
just after passing a station, and the convoy guard on the car platform might get careless, and you can
quickly press down on the flush pedal and, using your body as a shield, throw the letter into the hole.
It will get wet and soiled, but it might fall right through and land be- tween the rails. Or it might even
get through dry, and the draft beneath the car will catch and whirl it, and it will fall under the wheels
or miss them and land on the downward slope of the embankment. Perhaps it will lie there until it
rains, until it snows, until it disintegrates, but perhaps a human hand will pick it up. And if this
person isn't a stickler for the Party Une, he will make the address legible, he will straighten out the
letters, or perhaps put it in an envelope, and perhaps the letter will even reach its destination.
Sometimes such letters do arrive — postage due, half- blurred, washed out, crumpled, but carrying a
clearly defined splash of grief.

But it is better still to stop as soon as possible being a sucker — that ridiculous greenhorn, that prey,
that victim. The chances are ninety-five out of a hundred that your letter won't get there. But even if
it does, it will bring no happiness to your home. And you won't be measuring your life and breath by
hours and days once you have entered this epic country: arrivals and departures here are separated by
decades, by a quarter-century. You will never return to your former world. And the sooner you get
used to being without your near and dear ones, and the sooner they get used to being without you,
the better it will be. And the easier!

And keep as few things as possible, so that you don't have to fear for them. Don't take a suitcase for
the convoy guard to crush at the door of the car (when there are twenty-five people in a
compartment, what else could he figure out to do with it?). And don't wear new boots, and don't wear
fashionable oxfords, and don't wear a woolen suit: these things are going to be stolen, taken away,
swept aside, or switched, either in the Stolypin car, or in the Black Maria, or in the transit prison.
Give them up without a struggle — because otherwise the humiliation will poison your heart. They
will take them away from you in a fight, and trying to hold onto your property will only leave you
with a bloodied mouth. All those brazen snouts, those jeering manners, those two- legged dregs, are
repulsive to you. But by owning things and trembling about their fate aren't you forfeiting the rare
oppor- tunity of observing and understanding? And do you think that the freebooters, the pirates, the
great privateers, painted in such lively colors by Kipling and Gumilyev, were not simply these same
blatnye, these same thieves? That's just what they were. Fascinat- ing in romantic literary portraits,
why are they so repulsive to you here?



Understand them too! To them prison is their native home. No matter how fondly the government
treats them, no matter how it softens their punishments, no matter how often it amnesties them, their
inner destiny brings them back again and again. Was not the first word in the legislation of the
Archipelago for them? In our country, the right to own private property was at one time just as
effectively banished out in freedom too. (And then those who had banished it began to enjoy
possessing things.) So why should it be tolerated in prison? You were too slow about it; you didn't
eat up your fat bacon; you didn't share your sugar and tobacco with your friends. And so now the
thieves empty your bindle in order to correct your moral error. Having given you their pitiful worn-
out boots in exchange for your fashionable ones, their soiled coveralls in return for your sweater,
they won't keep these things for long: your boots were merely something to lose and win back five
times at cards, and they'll hawk your sweater the very next day for a liter of vodka and a round of
salami. They, too, will have nothing left of them in one day's time — just like you. This is the
principle of the second law of thermo- dynamics: all differences tend to level out, to disappear. . . .

Own nothing! Possess nothing! Buddha and Christ taught us this, and the Stoics and the Cynics.
Greedy though we are, why can't we seem to grasp that simple teaching? Can't we under- stand that
with property we destroy our soul?

So let the herring keep warm in your pocket until you get to the transit prison rather than beg for
something to drink here. And did they give us a two-day supply of bread and sugar? In that case, eat
it in one sitting. Then no one will steal it from you, and you won't have to worry about it. And you'll
be free as a bird in heaven!

Own only what you can always carry with you: know Ian- guages, know countries, know people. Let
your memory be your travel bag. Use your memory! Use your memory! It is those bitter seeds alone
which might sprout and grow someday.

Look around you — there are people around you. Maybe you will remember one of them all your life

and later eat your heart out because you didn't make use of the opportunity to ask him questions. And
the less you talk, the more you'll hear. Thin strands of human lives stretch from island to island of
the Archi- pelago. They intertwine, touch one another for one night only in just such a clickety-
clacking half-dark car as this and then separate once and for all. Put your ear to their quiet humming
and the steady clickety-clack beneath the car. After all, it is the spinning wheel of life that is clicking
and clacking away there.

What strange stories you can hear! What things you will laugh at.

Now that fast-moving little Frenchman over there near the grating — why does he keep twisting
around, what is he so sur- prised at? Explain things to him! And you can ask him at the same time
how he happened to land here. So you've found some- one who knows French, and you learn that he
is Max Santerre, a French soldier. And he used to be just as alert and curious out in freedom, in his
douce France. They told him politely to stop hanging around the transit point for Russian repatriates,
but he kept doing it anyway. And then the Russians invited him to have a drink with them, and from
a certain moment after that he remembers nothing. He came to on the floor of an airplane to find
himself dressed in a Red Army man's field shirt and britches, with the boots of a convoy guard
looming over him. They told him he was sentenced to ten years in camp, but that, of course, as he
very clearly understood, was just a nasty joke, wasn't it, and everything would be cleared up? Oh,
yes, it will be cleared up, dear fellow; just wait.

[Ahead of him lay another sentence — for twenty-five years — that he was given in camp, and he
would not get out of Ozerlag until 1957.]

Well, there was nothing to be surprised at in such cases in 1945-1946.



That particular story was Franco-Russian, and here is one which is Russo-French. But no, really just
pure Russian, be- cause no one but a Russian would play this kind of trick! Through- out our history
there have been people who just couldn't be con- tained, like Menshikov in Berezovo in Surikov's
painting. Now take Ivan Koverchenko, average height, wiry, and yet he couldn't be contained either.
Because he was a stalwart fellow with a healthy countenance — but the devil threw in a bit of vodka
for good measure. He would talk about himself quite willingly and laugh at himself too. Such stories
as his are a treasure. They are meant to be heard. True, it took a long time to figure out why he had
been arrested and why he was considered a political. But there's no real need to make a fetish of the
category "political" either. Does it matter a damn what rake they haul you in with?

As everyone knows very well, the Germans were preparing for chemical warfare and we weren't.
Therefore, it was most un- fortunate that because of some dunderheads in the quartermas- ter's
department we left whole stacks of mustard-gas bombs at a certain airdrome when we fled the
Kuban — and the Germans could have turned this fact into an international scandal. At that point.
Senior Lieutenant Koverchenko, a native of Krasnodar, was assigned twenty parachutists and
dropped behind the German lines to bury all those invidious bombs. (Those hearing this story have
already guessed how it ends and are yawning: next he was taken prisoner, and he has now become a
traitor of the Motherland. Nothing at all like that!) Koverchenko carried out his assignment
brilliantly and returned through the front with his entire complement of men, having lost not one, and
was nominated to receive the order of Hero of the Soviet Union.

But it takes a month or two for the official nomination to be confirmed — and what if you can't be
contained within that Hero of the Soviet Union either? "Heroes" are awarded to quiet boys who are
models of military and political preparedness — but what if your soul is afire and you want a drink,
and there isn't anything to drink? And why, if you're a Hero of the whole Union, are the rats being so
stingy as to refuse you an extra liter of vodka? And Ivan Koverchenko mounted his horse and, even
though it's true that he had never heard of Caligula, he rode his horse up- stairs to the second floor to
see the city's military commissar — the commandant: Come on now, issue me some vodka. (He
figured this would be more imposing, more in the style of a Hero, and harder to turn down.) Did they
arrest him for that? No, of course not! But his award was reduced from Hero to the Order of the Red
Banner.

Koverchenko had a large thirst, and vodka wasn't always available, and so he had to be inventive. In
Poland, he had gone in and prevented the Germans from blowing up a certain bridge — and he got
the feeling this bridge really belonged to him and so, for the time being, before our commandant's
headquarters arrived, he exacted payment from the Poles for crossing the bridge. After all, without
me you wouldn't have this bridge, you pests! He collected tolls for a whole day (for vodka), and then
got bored with it, and this wasn't in any case the place for him to stick around. So Captain
Koverchenko offered the nearby Poles his equitable solution: that they buy the bridge from him.
(Was he arrested for this ! Nooo!) He didn't ask very much for it, but the Poles protested and refused.
Pan Captain abandoned the bridge: All right then, to hell with you, take your bridge and cross it for
nothing.

In 1949 he was chief of staff of a parachute regiment in Po- lotsk. Major Koverchenko was very
much disliked by the Political Branch of the division because he had failed the political indoc-
trination course. He had once asked them to recommend him for admission to the Military Academy,
but when they gave him the recommendation, he took one look at it and threw it back across the
table at them: "With that kind of recommendation the place for me to go is not the Academy but to
the Banderovtsy [the Ukrainian nationalist rebels]." (Was he arrested for that? He might very well
have gotten a tenner for it, but he got away with it.) At that point, on top of all the rest, it turned out
that he had given one of his men an unwarranted leave. And then he himself drove a truck at
breakneck speed while drunk and wrecked it. And so they gave him ten — ten days in the guardhouse.
How- ever, his own men, who loved him with absolute devotion, were the guards, and they let him
out of the guardhouse to go and have fun in the village. So he could have been patient through that



guardhouse stretch too. But the Political Branch began to threaten him with a trial! Now that threat
shocked and insulted Kover- chenko; it meant: for burying bombs — Ivan, we need you; but for a
lousy one-and-a-half-ton truck — off to prison with you? He crawled out the window at night, went
over to the Dvina River, where a friend's motorboat was hidden, and off he went in it.

And it turned out that he wasn't just one more drunk with a short memory: he wanted to avenge
himself for everything the Political Branch had done to him; and in Lithuania he left his boat and
went to the Lithuanians, saying: "Brothers, take me to your partisans! Accept me and you won't be
sorry; we'll twist their tails." But the Lithuanians decided he was being planted on them.

Ivan had a letter of credit sewn in his clothes. He got a ticket to the Kuban. However, en route to
Moscow he got very drunk in a restaurant. Consequently, he squinched up his eyes at Moscow as
they were leaving the station, and told the taxi driver: "Take me to an embassy!" "Which one?"
"Who the hell cares? Any one." And the driver took him to one: "Which one is that?" "The French."
"All right."

Perhaps his thoughts got mixed up, and his original intentions in going to an embassy had changed
into something else, but his cleverness and his strength had in no wise lapsed: without alerting the
policemen at the embassy entrance, he went quietly down a side street and climbed to the top of a
smooth wall double a man's height. In the embassy yard it was easier: no one discovered him or
detained him, and he went on inside, walked through one room, then another, and he saw a table set.
There were many things on the table, but what astonished him most was the pears. He felt a yen for
them, and he stuffed all the pockets in his field jacket and trousers with them. At that moment, the
members of the household came in to dine. Koverchenko began to attack them and shout at them
before they could begin on him: "You Frenchmen!" According to him, France hadn't done anything
good for the last century. "Why don't you start a revolution? Why are you trying to get de Gaulle into
power? And you want us to send our Kuban wheat to you? It's no go." "Who are you? Where did you
come from?" The French were astounded. Im- mediately adopting the right approach, Koverchenko
kept his wits about him: "A major of the MGB." The French were frightened. "But even so, you are

not supposed to burst in here. What is your business here?" " you in the mouth!" Koverchenko

bel- lowed at them straight from the heart. And, after playing the hoodlum for them a while longer,
he noticed that in the next room they were already telephoning about him. He was still sober enough
to begin his retreat, but the pears started to fall out of his pockets — and he was pursued by mocking
laughter.

And in actual fact, he had enough strength left not only to leave the embassy safe and sound but to
move on. The next morn- ing he woke up in Kiev Station (was he not planning to go on to the West
Ukraine?), and they soon picked him up there.

During his interrogation he was beaten by Abakumov person- ally. And the scars on his back swelled
up to a hand's breadth.

The Minister beat him, of course, not because of the pears and not because of his valid rebuke to the
French, but to find out by whom and when he had been recruited. And, of course, the prison term
they handed him was twenty-five years.

There are many such stories, but like every railroad car, the Stolypin falls silent at night. At night
there won't be any fish, nor water, nor going to the toilet.

And the car is filled then with the steady noise of the wheels, which doesn't in the least break the
silence. And if, in addition, the convoy guard has left the corridor, one can talk quietly from the third
compartment for men with the fourth, or women's, com- partment.

A conversation with a woman in prison is quite special. There is something noble about it, even if



one talks only about articles of the Code and prison terms.

One such conversation went on all night long, and here are the circumstances in which it took place.
It was in July, 1950. There were no passengers in the women's compartment except for one young
girl, the daughter of a Moscow doctor, sentenced under Article 58-10. And there was a big to-do in
the men's compart- ment. The convoy guards began to drive all the zeks out of three compartments
into two (and don't even ask how many they piled up in there). And they brought in some offender
who was not at all like a convict. In the first place, he hadn't had his head shaved and his wavy blond
locks, real curls, lay seductively on his big, thoroughbred head. He was young, dignified, and
dressed in a British military uniform. He was escorted through the corridor with an air of deference
(the convoy itself had been a little awed by the instructions on the envelope containing his case file).
And the girl had managed to catch a glimpse of the whole episode. But he himself had not seen her.
(And how much he regretted that later!)

From the noise and the commotion she realized that the com- partment next to hers had been emptied
for him. It was obvious that he was not supposed to communicate with anyone — all the more reason
for her to want to talk with him. It wasn't possible in a Stolypin to see from one compartment into
another, but when everything was still, you could hear between them. Late at night, when things had
begun to quiet down, the girl sat on the edge of her bunk, right up against the grating, and called to
him quietly. (And perhaps she first sang softly. The convoy guard was supposed to punish her for all
this, but the guard itself had settled down for the night, and there was no one in the corridor.) The
stranger heard her and, following her instructions, sat in the same position. They were now sitting
with their backs to each other, braced against the same one-inch partition, and speaking quietly
through the grating at the outer edge of the partition. Their heads were as close as if their lips were
kissing, but they could neither touch one another nor see each other.

Erik Arvid Andersen understood Russian tolerably well by this time, made many mistakes when he
spoke it, but, in the end, could succeed in communicating his thoughts. He told the girl his
astonishing story (and we, too, will hear about it at the transit prison center). She, in turn, told him
the simple story of a Moscow student who had gotten 58-10. But Arvid was fascinated. He asked her
about Soviet youth and about Soviet life, and what he heard was not at all what he had learned earlier
in leftist Western newspapers and from his own official visit here.

They talked all night long. And that night everything came together for Arvid: the strange prisoners'
car in an alien country; the rhythmic nighttime clicking of the wheels, which always finds an echo in
our hearts; and the girl's melodic voice, her whispers, her breath reaching his ear — his very ear, yet
he couldn't even look at her. (And for a year and a half he hadn't heard a woman's voice.)

And for the first time, through that invisible (and probably, and, of course, necessarily beautiful) girl,
he began to see the real Russia, and the voice of Russia told him the truth all night long. One can
learn about a country for the first time this way too. (And in the morning he would glimpse Russia's
dark straw-thatched roofs through the window — to the sad whispering of his hidden guide.)

Yes, indeed, all this is Russia: the prisoners on the tracks refusing to voice their complaints, the girl
on the other side of the Stolypin partition, the convoy going off to sleep, pears falling out of pockets,
buried bombs, and a horse climbing to the second floor.

"The gendarmes! The gendarmes!" the prisoners cried out hap- pily. They were happy that they
would be escorted the rest of the way by the attentive gendarmes and not by the convoy.

Once again I have forgotten to insert quotation marks. That was Korolenko who was telling us
this. 13 We, it is true, were not happy to see the bluecaps. But anyone who ever got caught in what
the prisoners christened the pendulum would have been glad to see even them.



An ordinary passenger might have a difficult time boarding a train at a small way station — but not
getting off. Toss your things out and jump off. This was not the case with a prisoner, however. If the
local prison guard or police didn't come for him or was late by even two minutes, toot-toot, the
whistle would blow, and the train would get under way, and they would take the poor sinner of a
prisoner all the way to the next transit point. And it was all right if it was actually a transit point that
they took you to, because they would begin to feed you again there. But sometimes it was all the way
to the end of the Stolypin's route, and then they would keep you for eighteen hours in an empty car
and take you back with a whole new group of prisoners, and then once again, maybe, they wouldn't
come for you — and once again you'd be in a blind alley, and once again you'd wait there and during
all that time they wouldn't feed you. Your rations, after all, were issued only until your first stop, and
the accounting office isn't to blame that the prison messed things up, for you are, after all, listed for
Tulun. And the con- voy isn't responsible for feeding you out of its own rations. So they swing you
back and forth six times (it has actually happened!): Irkutsk to Krasnoyarsk, Krasnoyarsk to Irkutsk,
Irkutsk to Krasnoyarsk, etc., etc., etc., and when you do see a blue visor on the Tulun platform, you
are ready to throw your arms around him: Thank you, beloved, for saving me.

You get so worn down, so choked, so shattered in a Stolypin, even in two days' time, that before you
get to a big city you yourself don't know whether you would rather keep going in torment just to get
there sooner, or whether you'd rather be put in a transit prison to recover a little.

But the convoy guards begin to hustle and bustle. They come out with their overcoats on and knock
their gunstocks on the floor. That means they are going to unload the whole car.

First the convoy forms up in a circle at the car steps, and no sooner have you dropped, fallen,
tumbled down them, than the guards shout at you deafeningly in unison from all sides (as they have
been taught): "Sit down, sit down, sit down!" This is very effective when several voices are shouting
it at once and they don't let you raise your eyes. It's like being under shellfire, and involuntarily you
squirm, hurry (and where is there for you to hurry to?), crouch close to the ground, and sit down,
having caught up with those who disembarked earlier.

"Sit down!" is a very clear command, but if you are a new prisoner, you don't yet understand it.
When I heard this com- mand on the switching tracks in Ivanovo, I ran, clutching my suitcase in my
arms (if a suitcase has been manufactured out in freedom and not in camp, its handle always breaks
off and al- ways at a difficult moment), and set it down on end on the ground and without looking
around to see how the first prisoners were sitting, sat down on the suitcase. After all, to sit down
right on the ties, on the dark oily sand, in my officer's coat, which was not yet so very dirty and
which still had uncut flaps! The chief of the convoy — a ruddy mug, a good Russian face — broke into
a run, and I hadn't managed to grasp what he wanted and why until I saw that he meant, clearly, to
plant his sacred boot in my cursed back but something restrained him. However, he didn't spare his
polished toe and kicked the suitcase and smashed in the top. "Sit down!" he gritted by way of
explanation. Only at that point did it dawn on me that I towered over the surround- ing zeks, and
without even having the chance to ask: "How am I supposed to sit down?" I already understood how,
and sat down in my precious coat, like everybody else, just as dogs sit at gates and cats at doors.

(I still have that suitcase, and even now when I chance to come upon it, I run my fingers around the
hole torn in it. It is a wound which cannot heal as wounds heal on bodies or on hearts. Things have
longer memories than people.)

And forcing prisoners to sit down was also a calculated maneuver. If you are sitting on your rear end
on the ground, so that your knees tower in front of you, then your center of gravity is well back of
your legs, and it is difficult to get up and im- possible to jump up. And more than that, they would
make us sit as tightly massed together as possible so that we'd be in each other's way. And if all of us
wanted to attack the convoy to- gether, they would have mowed us down before we got moving.



They had us sitting there to wait for the Black Maria (it trans- ports the prisoners in batches, you
couldn't get them all in at once), or else to be herded off on foot. They would try to sit us down
someplace hidden so that fewer free people would see us, but at times they did make the prisoners sit
right there awkwardly on the platform or in an open square. (That is how it was in Kuibyshev.) And
it is a difficult experience for the free people: we stare at them quite freely and openly with a totally
sincere gaze, but how are they supposed to look at us? With hatred? Their consciences don't permit
it. (After all, only the Yermilovs believe that people were imprisoned "for cause.") With sym- pathy?
With pity? Be careful, someone will take down your name and they'll set you up for a prison term
too; it's that simple. And our proud free citizens (as in Mayakovsky: "Read it, envy me, I am a
citizen") drop their guilty heads and try not to see us at all, as if the place were empty. The old
women are bolder than the rest. You couldn't turn them bad. They believe in God. And they would
break off a piece of bread from their meager loaf and throw it to us. And old camp hands —
nonpolitical offenders, of course — weren't afraid either. All camp veterans knew the say- ing:
"Whoever hasn't been there yet will get there, and whoever was there won't forget it." And look,
they'd toss over a pack of cigarettes, hoping that someone might do the same for them during their
next term. And the old woman's bread wouldn't quite carry far enough, what with her weak arm, and
it would fall short, whereas the pack of cigarettes would arch through the air right into our midst, and
the convoy guards would im- mediately work the bolts of their rifles — pointing them at the old
woman, at kindness, at the bread: "Come on, old woman, run along."

And the holy bread, broken in two, was left to lie in the dust while we were driven off.

In general, those minutes of sitting on the ground there at the station were among our very best. I
remember that in Omsk we were made to sit down on the railroad ties between two long freight
trains. No one from outside entered this alleyway. (In all probability, they had stationed a soldier at
either end: "You can't go in there." And even in freedom our people are taught to take orders from
anyone in a uniform.) It began to grow dark. It was August. The oily station gravel hadn't yet
completely cooled off from the sun and warmed us where we sat. We couldn't see the station, but it
was very close by, somewhere behind the trains. A phonograph blared dance music, and the crowd
buzzed in unison. And for some reason it didn't seem humiliating to sit on the ground in a crowded
dirty mass in some kind of pen; and it wasn't a mockery to hear the dances of young strangers,
dances we would never dance; to picture someone on the station platform meeting someone or
seeing someone off — maybe even with flowers. It was twenty minutes of near-freedom: the twilight
deepened, the first stars began to shine, there were red and green lights along the tracks, and the
music kept playing. Life was going on without us — and we didn't even mind any more.

Cherish such moments, and prison will become easier to bear. Otherwise you will explode from rage.

And if it was dangerous to herd the zeks along to the Black Maria because there were streets and
people right next to them, then the convoy statutes provided another good command: "Link arms!"
There was nothing humiliating in this — link arms ! Old men and boys, girls and old women, healthy
people and cripples. If one of your hands is hanging onto your belongings, your neighbor puts his
arm under that arm and you in turn link your other arm with your other neighbor's. So you have now
been compressed twice as tightly as in ordinary formation, and you have immediately become
heavier and are hampered by being thrown out of balance by your belongings and by your awkward-
ness with them, and you sway steadily as you limp. Dirty, gray, clumsy creatures, you move ahead
like bund men with an ostensible tenderness for one another — a caricature of humanity.

It may well be that no Black Maria at all is there to fetch you. And the chief of convoy is perhaps a
coward. He is afraid he will fail to deliver you safely — and in this state, weighed down, jouncing as
you go, knocking into things, you trudge all the way through the city to the prison itself.

There is one more command which is a caricature of geese: "Take hold of your heels!" This meant
that anyone whose hands were free had to grab both his legs at about ankle height. And now:



"Forward march." (Well, now, reader, put this book aside, try going around the room that way! How
does it work? And at what speed? How much looking around could you do? And what about
escaping?) Picture the way three or four dozen such geese look from the side. (Kiev, 1940.)

And it is not necessarily August out; it might be December, 1946, and, there being no Black Maria,
you are being herded at 40 degrees below zero to the Petropavlovsk Transit Prison. And it is easy to
guess that during the last hours before arriv- ing the Stolypin convoy refused to go to the trouble of
taking you to the toilet, so as to avoid getting it dirty. Weakened from interrogation, gripped by the
cold, you have a very hard time holding it — women especially. Well, and so what! It's for horses to
stand stock-still and loose the floodgates! It's for dogs to go lift a leg against a fence. But as for
people, you can do it right there, while you keep moving. No need to be shy in your own fatherland.
It will dry at the transit prison. . . . Vera Komeyeva stooped down to adjust her shoe and fell one step
behind, and the convoy immediately set the police dog on her and the dog bit her in the buttocks
through all her winter clothing. Don't fall behind! And an Uzbek fell down, and they beat him with
their gunstocks and jackboots.

Well, that's no tragedy: it won't be photographed for the Daily Express. And the chief of convoy will
Uve to a ripe old age and never be tried by anyone.

And the Black Marias, too, came down to us from history. In what respect does the prison carriage
described by Balzac differ from a Black Maria? Only that the prison carriage was drawn along more
slowly, and prisoners weren't packed so tightly.

True, in the twenties columns of prisoners were still being driven afoot through our cities, even
Leningrad. They brought traffic to a halt at intersections. ("So you got caught stealing?" came the
reproaches from the sidewalks. No one had yet grasped the great plan for sewage disposal.)

But, always alert to technological trends, the Archipelago lost no time in adopting the black ravens,
more familiarly known simply as ravens — Black Marias. These first Black Marias ap- peared at the
same time as the very first trucks on our still cob- blestoned streets. Their suspension was poor, and
it was very rough riding in them, but then the prisoners weren't made of crystal either. On the other
hand, they were very tightly corked even at that time, in 1927: there wasn't one little crack; and there
wasn't one little electric light bulb, and there wasn't any air to breathe, and it was impossible to see
out. And even in those days they stood so tightly packed inside that there wasn't any room left at all.
And it wasn't that all this was intentionally planned; there simply weren't enough wheels to go
around.

For many years the Black Marias were steel-gray and had, so to speak, prison written all over them.
But in the biggest cities after the war they had second thoughts and decided to paint them bright
colors and to write on the outside, "Bread" (the prisoners were the bread of construction), or
"Meat" (it would have been more accurate to write "bones"), or even, simply, "Drink Soviet
Champagne!"

Inside, the Black Marias might consist of a simple armored body or shell, an empty enclosure. Or

perhaps there were benches against the walls all the way around. This was in no sense a con-
venience, but the reverse: they would push in just as many prisoners as could be inserted standing
up, but in this case they would be piled on top of each other like baggage, one bale on another. The
Black Maria might also have a box in the rear — a narrow steel closet for one prisoner. Or it might be
boxed throughout: single closets that locked like cells along the right- and left-hand walls, with a
corridor in the middle for the turnkey.

One was hardly likely to imagine that interior like a honey- comb when looking at that laughing
maiden on the outside: "Drink Soviet Champagne!"



They drive you into the Black Marias to the tune of the same shouts coming from the convoy from
all sides at once: "Come on there, get a move on, quick!" And so that you shouldn't have time to look
around and figure out how to escape, you are shoved and pushed so that you and your bag get stuck
in the narrow little door and you knock your head against the lintel. The steel rear door slams shut
with a bang — and off you go.

It was rare, of course, to spend hours in a Black Maria; twenty to thirty minutes were more likely.
But you got flung around, it was a bone-breaker, it crushed all your insides during those half- hours,
your head stooped if you were tall, and you remembered the cozy Stolypin with longing.

And the Black Maria means one thing further — it is a re- shuffling of the deck, new encounters, and
among them those which stand out most clearly are, of course, your encounters with the thieves. You
may never happen to be in the same compart- ment with them, and maybe they won't put you in the
same cell with them even at the transit prison, but here in the Black Maria you are in their hands.

Sometimes it is so crowded that even the thieves, the urki, find it awkward to filch. Your legs and
your arms are clamped between your neighbors' bodies and bags as tightly as if they were in stocks.
Only when all of you are tossed up and down and all your insides are shaken up by ruts and bumps
can you change the position of your legs and arms.

Sometimes, in less crowded circumstances, the thieves can check out the contents of all the bags in
just half an hour and appropriate all the "bacilli" — the fats and goodies — and the best of the
"trash" — the clothing. Cowardly and sensible considera- tions most likely restrain you from putting
up a fight against them. (And crumb by crumb you are already beginning to lose your immortal soul,
still supposing that the main enemies and the main issues lie somewhere ahead and that you must
save yourself for them.) And you might just throw a punch at them once and get a knife in the ribs
then and there. (There would be no in- vestigation, and even if there should be one, it wouldn't
threaten the thieves in any way: they would only be delayed at the transit prison instead of going to
the far-off camp. You must concede that in a fight between a socially friendly prisoner and a socially
hostile prisoner the state simply could not be on the side of the latter.)

In 1946, retired Colonel Lunin, a high-ranking official in Osoaviakhim — the Society for Assistance
to Defense and to Aviation-Chemical Construction of the U.S.S.R. — recounted in a Butyrki cell how
the thieves in a Moscow Black Maria, on March 8, International Women's Day, during their transit
from the City Court to Taganka Prison, gang-raped a young bride in his presence (and amid the silent
passivity of everyone else in the van). That very morning the girl had come to her trial a free person,
as attractively dressed as she could manage (she was on trial for leaving her work without official
permission — which in itself was a repulsive fabrication worked up by her chief in revenge for her
refusal to live with him). A half -hour before the Black Maria, the girl had been sentenced to five
years under the decree and had then been shoved into this Black Maria, and right there in broad
daylight, somewhere on the Park Ring ("Drink Soviet Champagne!"), had been turned into a camp
prostitute. And are we really to say that it was the thieves who did this to her and not the jailers? And
not her chief?

And thief tenderness too! Having raped her, they robbed her. They took the fashionable shoes with
which she had hoped to charm the judges, and her blouse — which they shoved through to the convoy
guards, who stopped the van and went off to get some vodka and handed it in so the thieves could
drink at her expense too.

And when they got to the Taganka Prison, the girl sobbed out her complaint. And the officer listened
to her, yawned, and said: "The government can't provide each of you with individual transportation.
We don't have such facilities."

Yes, the Black Marias are a "bottleneck" of the Archipelago. If there is no possibility of separating



the politicals from the criminals in the Stolypins, then it isn't possible to keep women separate from
men in the Black Marias. And just how could one expect the thieves not to live it up en route from
one jail to another?

Well, and if it weren't for the thieves, we would have to be grateful to the Black Marias for our brief
encounters with women! Where, if not here, is one to see them, hear them, and touch them in a
prison existence?

Once in 1950 they were transporting us from the Butyrki to the station in a not at all crowded van —
fourteen people in a Black Maria with benches. Everyone sat down, and suddenly they pushed in one
more — a woman, alone. She sat down beside the rear door, fearfully at first. After all, she was totally
defense- less against fourteen men in a dark cell. But it became clear after a few words that all those
present were comrades. Fifty -eights.

She gave us her name — Repina, a colonel's wife, and she had been arrested right after he had. And
suddenly a silent military man, so young and thin that it seemed he had to be a lieutenant, said to her:
"Tell me, weren't you arrested with Antonina I.?" "What? Are you her husband? Oleg?" "Yes!"
"Lieutenant Colonel L? From the Frunze Academy?" "Yes!"

What a yes that was! It emerged from a trembling throat, and in it there was more fear of finding out
something bad than there was happiness. He sat down next to her. Twilight shafts of summer
daylight, diffused through two microscopic gratings in the two rear doors, flickered around the
interior as the van moved along and across the faces of the woman and the lieutenant colonel. "She
and I were imprisoned in the same cell for four months while she was undergoing interrogation."
"Where is she now?" "All that time she lived only for you! Her fears weren't for herself but were all
for you. First that they shouldn't arrest you. And then later that you should get a lighter sentence."
"But what has happened to her now?" "She blamed herself for your arrest. Things were so hard for
her!" "Where is she now?" "Just don't be frightened" — and Repina put her hands on his chest as if he
were her own kin. "She simply couldn't endure the strain. They took her away from us. She, you
know, became — well, a little confused. You understand?"

And that tiny storm boxed in sheets of steel rolled along so peacefully in the six-lane automobile
traffic, stopped at traffic lights, and signaled for a turn.

I had met Oleg I. in the Butyrki just a few moments before — and here is how it happened. They had
herded us into the station "box" and had brought us our things from the storage room. They called
him and me to the door at the same moment. Through the opened door into the corridor we could see
a woman jailer rifling the contents of his suitcase, and she flung out of it and onto the floor a golden
shoulder board with the stars of a lieutenant colonel that had survived until then all by itself, heaven
only knows how; she herself hadn't noticed it, and she had ac- cidentally stepped on its big stars with
her foot.

She had trampled it with her shoe — exactly as in a film shot.

I said to him: "Direct your attention to that. Comrade Lieutenant Colonel!"

And he glowered. After all, he still had his ideas about the spotlessness of the service.

And now here was the next thing — about his wife.

And he had had only one hour to fit all this in.



Chapter 2



The Ports

of the Archipelago



Spread out on a large table the enormous map of our Mother- land. Indicate with fat black dots all
provincial capitals, all railroad junctions, all transfer points where the railroad line ends in a river
route, and where rivers bend and trails begin. What is this? Has the entire map been speckled by
infectious flies? What it is, in fact, is precisely the majestic map of the ports of the Archipelago.
These are not, to be sure, the enchanted ports to which Aleksandr Grin enticed us, where rum is
drunk in taverns and men pay court to beautiful women.

It is a rare zek who has not known from three to five transit prisons and camps; many remember a
dozen or so, and the sons of Gulag can count up to fifty of them without the slightest dif- ficulty.
However, in memory they get all mixed up together be- cause they are so similar: in the illiteracy of
their convoys, in their inept roll calls based on case files; the long waiting under the beating sun or
autumn drizzle; the still longer body searches that involve undressing completely; their haircuts with
unsanitary clippers; their cold, slippery baths; their foul- smelling toilets; their damp and moldy
corridors; their perpetually crowded, nearly always dark, wet cells; the warmth of human flesh
flanking you on the floor or on the board bunks; the bumpy ridges of bunk heads knocked together
from boards; the wet, almost liquid, bread; the gruel cooked from what seems to be silage.

And whoever has a good sharp memory and can recollect precisely what distinguishes one from
another has no need to travel about the country because he knows its geography full well on the basis
of transit prisons. Novosibirsk? I know it. I was there. Very strong barracks there, made from thick
beams. Irkutsk? That was where the windows had been bricked over in several stages, you could see
how they had been in Tsarist times, and each course had been laid separately, and only small slits
had been left between them. Vologda? Yes, an ancient build- ing with towers. The toilets right on top
of one another, the wooden partitions rotten, and the ones above leaking down into the ones
underneath. Usman? Of course. A lice-ridden stinking hole of a jail, an ancient vaulted structure.
And they used to pack it so full that whenever they took prisoners out for a transport you couldn't
imagine where they'd put them all — a line strung out halfway through the city.

You had better not tell such a connoisseur that you know some city without a transit prison. He will
prove to you conclusively that there are no such cities, and he will be right. Salsk? Well, there they
keep transit prisoners in the KPZ — cells for prelim- inary detention — along with prisoners under
interrogation. And what do you mean, no transit prison in every district center too? In Sol-Iletsk? Of
course there's one. In Rybinsk? What about Prison No. 2, a former monastery? It's a quiet one, too,
with empty courtyards paved with old, mossy flagstones and clean wooden tubs in the bath. In
Chita? Prison No. 1. In Naushki? Not a prison but a transit camp, which is the same thing. In
Torzhok? Up the hill, also in a monastery.

You must realize, dear sir, that every town has to have its own transit prison. After all, the courts
operate everywhere. And how are prisoners to be delivered to camp? By air?

Of course, no transit prison is the equal of another. But which is better and which worse is something
that can't be settled in an argument. If three or four zeks get together, each of them feels bound to
praise his "own." Let us listen for a while to such a discussion:

"Well, even if the Ivanovo Transit Prison isn't one of the more famous, my friends, just ask anybody
imprisoned there in the winter of 1937-1938. The prison was unheated — and the prison- ers not only
didn't freeze to death, but on the upper bunks they lay there undressed. And they knocked out all the
windowpanes so as not to suffocate. Instead of the twenty men Cell 21 was supposed to contain,
there were three hundred and twenty-three! There was water underneath the bunks, and boards were
laid in the water and people lay on those boards. That was right where the frost poured in from the
broken windows. It was like Arctic night down under the bunks. There was no light down there



either because it was cut off by the people lying on the bunks above and standing in the aisle. It was
impossible to walk through the aisle to the latrine tank, and people crawled along the edges of the
bunks. They didn't distribute rations to individuals but to units of ten. If one of the ten died, the
others shoved his corpse under the bunks and kept it there until it started to stink. They got the
corpse's ration. And all that could have been endured, but the turnkeys seemed to have been oiled
with turpentine — and they kept driving the prisoners endlessly from cell to cell, on and on. You'd
just get yourself settled when 'Come on, get a move on! You're being moved!' And you'd have to
start in again trying to find a place! And the reason for such overcrowding was that they hadn't taken
anyone to the bath for three months, the lice had multiplied, and people had abscesses from the lice
on their feet and legs — and typhus too. And because of the typhus the prison was quarantined and no
prisoner transports could leave it for four months."

"Well, fellows, the problem there wasn't Ivanovo, but the year. In 1937-1938, of course, not just the
zeks but the very stones of the transit prisons were screaming in agony. Irkutsk was no special transit
prison either, but in 1938 the doctors didn't even dare look into the cells but would walk down the
corridor while the turnkey shouted through the door: 'Anyone unconscious, come out. ' "

"In 1937, fellows, it was that way all across Siberia to the Kolyma, and the big bottleneck was in the
Sea of Okhotsk, and in Vladivostok. The steamships could transport only thirty thou- sand a month,
and they kept driving them on and on from Moscow without taking that into account. Well, and so a
hundred thousand of them piled up. Understand?"

"Who counted them?"

"Whoever was supposed to, counted."

"If you're talking about the Vladivostok Transit Prison, then in February, 1937, there weren't more
than forty thousand there."

"People were stuck there for several months at a time. The bedbugs infested the board bunks like
locusts. Half a mug of water a day; there wasn't any more! — no one to haul it. There was one whole
compound of Koreans, and they all died from dysentery, every last one of them. They took a hundred
corpses out of our own compound every morning. They were building a morgue, so they hitched the
zeks to the carts and hauled the stone that way. Today you do the hauling, and tomorrow they haul
you there yourself. And in autumn the typhus arrived. And we did the same thing: we didn't hand
over the corpses till they stank — and took the extra rations. No medication whatever. We crawled to
the fence and begged: 'Give us medicine.' And the guards fired a volley from the watchtowers. Then
they as- sembled those with typhus in a separate barracks. Some didn't make it there, and only a few
came back. The bunks there had two stories. And anyone on an upper who was sick and running a
fever wasn't able to clamber down to go to the toilet — and so it would all pour down on the people
underneath. There were fifteen hundred sick there. And all the orderlies were thieves. They'd pull out
the gold teeth from the corpses. And not only from the corpses."

"Why do you keep going on and on about 1937? What about 1949 on Vanino Bay, in the fifth
compound? What about that? There were 35,000! And for several months too! There was an- other
bottleneck in transport to the Kolyma. And every night for some reason they kept driving people
from one barracks to an- other and from one compound to another. Just as it was with the Fascists:
Whistles! Screams! 'Come on out there without the last, one!'

["Without the last one!" — a menacing command to be understood literally. It meant: "I will kill the
last man" (literally or at least warm his hide with a club). And so all piled out so as not to be last.]

And everyone went on the run! Always on the run! They'd drive a hundred to get bread — on the run!
For gruel — on the run! No bowls to eat from. Take the gruel in whatever you could — the flap of your



coat, your hands! They brought water in big tanks and there was nothing to distribute it in, so they
shot it out in sprays. And whoever could get his mouth in front of one got some. Prisoners began to
fight in front of the tanks — and the guards fired on them from the towers. Exactly like under the
Fascists! Major General Derevyanko, the Chief of Administration of the Northeast [i.e., Kolyma]
Corrective Labor Camps, came, and while he was there an air force aviator stepped out in front of
the crowd and ripped his field shirt down the front: 1 have seven battle decorations! Who gave you
the right to shoot into the compound?' And Derevyanko replied: 'We shot and we will go on shooting
until you learn how to behave.' "

[Say there, Bertrand Russell's "War Crimes Tribunal" ! Why don't you use this bit of material? Or
doesn't it suit you?]

"No, boys, none of those are real transit prisons. Now take Kirov! That was a real one! Let's not take
any special year, but, say, 1947. Even then in Kirov two turnkeys had to work together with their
boots to jam people into a cell, that being the only way they could get the door shut. In September
(and Kirov — formerly Vyatka — isn't on the Black Sea either) everyone was sitting naked on the
three-story bunks because of the heat. They were sitting because there was no place to lie down: one
row sat at the heads of the bunks and one row at the feet. And two rows sat on the floor in the aisle,
and others stood between them, and they took turns. They kept their knapsacks in their hands or on
their knees because there was nowhere to put them down. Only the thieves were in their lawful
places, the second-story bunks next to the windows, and they spread out as they pleased. There were
so many bedbugs that they went right on biting in the daytime, and they dive-bombed straight from
the ceiling. And people had to suffer through that for a week or even a month."

I myself would like to interrupt in order to tell about Krasnaya Presnya in August, 1945, in the
Victory summer, but I am shy: after all, in Krasnaya Presnya we could somehow stretch out our legs
at night, and the bedbugs were moderate, and flies bit us all night long as we lay naked and sweaty
under the bright lights, but of course that's nothing at all, and I would be ashamed to boast about it.

[This transit prison with its glorious revolutionary name is little known to Muscovites. There are no
excursions to it, and how could there be when it is still in operation? But to get a close look at it, you
don't have to travel any distance at all. It's a mere stone's throw from the Novokhoroshevo High- way
on the circle line.]

We streamed with sweat every time we moved, and it simply poured out of us after we ate. There
were a hundred of us in a cell a little larger than the average room in an apart- ment, and we were
packed in, and you couldn't find a place on the floor for your feet. And two little windows on the
south side were blocked with "muzzles" made of steel sheets. They not only kept the air from
circulating, but they got very hot from the sun and radiated heat into the cell.

Just as all transit prisons are pointless, talk about transit prisons is pointless, and, in all probability,
this chapter, too, will turn out to be the same: one doesn't know what to take hold of first, what
particular thing to talk about, what to lead off with. And the more people that are crowded into
transit prisons, the more pointless it all becomes. It is unbearable for a human being, and it is
inexpedient for Gulag — but people sit there month after month. And the transit prison becomes a
straight factory: bread rations are lugged in, stacked up in hand barrows like those in which bricks
are hauled. And the steaming gruel is brought in six-bucket wooden casks that have holes knocked in
them with a crowbar.

The transit prison at Kotlas was tenser and more aboveboard than many. Tenser because it opened
the way to the whole North- east of European Russia, and more aboveboard because it was already
deep in the Archipelago, and there was no need to pre- tend to anybody. It was simply a piece of land
divided into cages by fencing and the cages were all kept locked. Although it had been thickly settled
by peasants when they were exiled in 1930 (one must realize that they had no roofs over their heads.



but nobody is left to tell about it), even in 1938 there simply wasn't room for everyone in the frail
one-story wooden barracks made of discarded end-pieces of lumber and covered with ... tarpaulin.
Under the wet autumn snow and in freezing tempera- tures people simply lived there on the ground,
beneath the heavens. True, they weren't allowed to grow numb from in- activity. They were being
counted endlessly; they were in- vigorated by check-ups (twenty thousand people were there at a
time) or by sudden night searches. Later on tents were pitched in these cages, and log houses two
stories high were built in some of them, but to reduce the construction costs sensibly, no floor was
laid between the stories — six-story bunks with stepladders were simply built into the sides, up and
down which prisoners on their last legs, on the verge of dying, had to clamber like sailors (a structure
which would have adorned a ship more appropriately than a port). In the winter of 1944-1945, when
everyone had a roof over his head, there was room for only 7,500 prisoners, and fifty of them died
every day, and the stretchers on which they were carried to the morgue were never idle. (People will
object that this was quite acceptable — a death rate of less than one percent per day — and that, given
that sort of turnover, a person might manage to last five months. Yes, but the main killer was camp
labor, and that hadn't even begun yet for transit prisoners. This loss of two-thirds of one percent per
day repre- sents sheer shrinkage, and it would be intolerably high even in some vegetable
warehouses.)

The deeper into the Archipelago one got, the more obviously did the concrete docks of the
Archipelago become transformed into wharves made of wooden pilings.

In the course of several years, half a million people passed through Karabas, the transit camp near
Karaganda, whose name became a byword in the language. (Yuri Karbe was there in 1942 and was
already registered in the 433rd thousand.) The transit prison consisted of low rammed-earth barracks
with earthen floors. Daily recreation there consisted in driving all the prisoners out with their things
and putting artists to work white- washing the floor and even painting carpets on it, and then in the
evening the zeks would lie down on it, and their bodies would rub out both the whitewash and the
carpets.

[Of all the transit prisons Karabas was worthiest of becoming a museum. But, alas, it no longer
exists: in its place there is a factory for reinforced- concrete products.]

The Knyazh-Pogost transit point (latitude 63 degrees north) consisted of shacks built on a swamp.
Their pole frames were covered with torn tarpaulin tenting that didn't quite reach the ground. The
double bunks inside them were also made of poles (from which, incidentally, the branches had been
only partially removed), and the aisle was floored with poles also. During the day, the wet mud
squelched through the flooring, and at night it froze. In various parts of the area, the walkways were
laid on frail and shaky poles and here and there people whom weakness had made clumsy fell into
the water and ooze. In 1938 they fed the prisoners in Knyazh-Pogost the same thing every day: a
mash made of crushed grits and fish bones. This was convenient be- cause there were no bowls,
spoons, or forks at the transit prison and the prisoners had none of their own either. They were
herded to the boiler by the dozens and the mash was ladled into their caps or the flaps of their
jackets.

And in the transit prison of Vogvozdino (several miles from Ust-Vym), where five thousand
prisoners were kept at a time (now who ever heard of Vogvozdino before this sentence? how many
such unknown transit prisons were there? and then multiply that by 5,000), the food was liquid, but
they had no bowls either. However, they managed without them (what is there that our Russian
ingenuity cannot overcome?) by distributing the gruel in washbasins for ten people at a time, leaving
them to race each other gulping it down.

[Galina Serebryakova! Boris Dyakov! Aldan-Semyonov ! Did you ever gulp from a washbasin, ten at
a time? And if you had, you would never, of course, have descended to the "animal needs" of Ivan
Denisovich, would you? And in the midst of the mob scene at the washbasin you would have



continued to think only about your dear Party?]

True, no one was imprisoned in Vogvozdino longer than a year. (The kind of prisoner who would
have been imprisoned there that long was a prisoner on his last legs whom all the camps had refused
to accept.)

The imagination of writers is poverty-stricken in regard to the native life and customs of the
Archipelago. When they want to write about the most reprehensible and disgraceful aspect of prison,
they always accuse the latrine bucket. In literature the latrine bucket has become the symbol of
prison, a symbol of humiliation, of stink. Oh, how frivolous can you be? Now was the latrine bucket
really an evil for the prisoner? On the contrary, it was the most merciful device of the prison
administration. The actual horror began the moment there was no latrine bucket in the cell.

In 1937 there were no latrine buckets in certain Siberian prisons, or there weren't enough. Not
enough of them had been made ahead of time — Siberian industry hadn't caught up with the full
scope of arrests. There were no latrine barrels in the warehouses for the newly created cells. There
were old latrine buckets in the cells, but they were antiquated and small, and the only reasonable
thing to do at that point was to remove them, since they amounted to nothing at all for the new
reinforcements of prisoners. So if long ago the Minusinsk Prison had been built for five hundred
people (Vladimir Ilyich Lenin was never inside it; he moved about freely), and there were now ten
thousand in it, it meant that each latrine bucket ought to have become twenty times bigger. But it had
not.

Our Russian pens write only in large letters. We have lived through so very much, and almost none

of it has been described and called by its right name. But, for Western authors, peering through a
microscope at the living cells of everyday life, shaking a test tube in the beam of a strong light, this
is after all a whole epic, another ten volumes of Remembrance of Things Past: to describe the
perturbation of a human soul placed in a cell filled to twenty times its capacity and with no latrine
bucket, where prisoners are taken out to the toilet only once a day! Of course, much of the texture of
this life is bound to be quite unknown to Western writers; they wouldn't realize that in this situation
one solution was to urinate in your canvas hood, nor would they at all understand one prisoner's
advice to another to urinate in his boot! And yet that advice was the fruit of wisdom derived from
vast experience, and it didn't involve spoiling the boot and it didn't reduce the boot to the status of a
pail. It meant that the boot had to be taken off, turned upside down, the boot tops turned inside out
and up — and thus a cylindrical vessel was formed that constituted the much-needed container. But,
at the same time, with what psychological twists and turns Western writers could enrich their
literature (without in the least risking any banal repe- tition of the famous masters) if they only knew
about the scheme of things in that same Minusinsk Prison: there was only one food bowl for every
four prisoners; and one mug of drinking water per day was issued to each (there were enough mugs
to go around). And it could happen that one of the four contrived to use the bowl allotted to him and
three others to relieve his internal pres- sure and then refuse to hand over his daily water ration to
wash it out before lunch. What a conflict! What a clash of four per- sonalities! What nuances! (And I
am not joking. That is when the rock bottom of a human being is revealed. It is only that Russian
pens are too busy to write about it, and Russian eyes don't have time to read about it. I am not
joking — because only doctors can tell us how months in such a cell will ruin a human being's health
for his entire life, even if he wasn't shot under Yezhov and was rehabilitated under Khrushchev.)

And just to think that we had dreamed of resting and loosening up a bit in port! After being squashed
and doubled up for sev- eral days in the Stolypin, how we had dreamed of the transit prison! That we
could stretch out a bit there and straighten up. That we would be able to go to the toilet there without
hurrying! That we would drink as much water there as we wanted, and get as much hot water for tea.
That there we wouldn't be forced to ransom our own bread rations from the convoy with our own
belongings. That we would be fed hot food there. And that at last we would be taken to the bath, that
we could drench our- selves in hot water and stop itching. We had had elbows stuck into our sides



and been tossed from side to side in the Black Maria; and they had shouted at us: "Link arms!" "Take
hold of your heels !" But we were in good spirits anyway: it was all right, all right, soon we would be
at the transit prison! And now we were there.

And even if some part of our dreams came true in the transit prison, something else would foul it all
up anyway.

What awaits us in the bath? You can never be sure. They begin suddenly to shave all the women's
hair off. (In Krasnaya Presnya, in November, 1950.) Or a line of us naked men is clipped by women
barbers only. In the Vologda steam room, portly Aunt Motya used to shout: "Stand up, men!" And
she'd let the whole line have it from the steam pipe. And the Irkutsk Transit Prison argued
differently: it's more natural for the entire service staff in the bath to be male and for a man to smear
on the medicinal tar ointment between the women's legs. Or during the winter, in the cold soaping-
up room of the Novosibirsk Transit Prison only cold water comes from the faucets; the prisoners
make up their minds to ask higher-ups, and a captain comes, puts his own hand unfastidiously under
a faucet: "I say this water is hot, get it?" I have already wearied of reporting that there are baths
which have no water at all, that they scorch clothes in the roaster, that after the bath they compel
people to run naked and barefoot through the snow to get their things (the counterintelligence of the
Second Byelorussian Front in Brodnica in 1945).

From your very first steps in the transit prison you realize that here you are not in the hands of the
jailers or the officers of the prison administration, who at least adhere some of the time to some kind
of written law. Here you are in the hands of the trusties. That surly bath attendant who comes to
meet your prisoner transport: "Well, go wash, gentlemen Fascists!" And that work-assignment clerk
with a plywood writing board who looks over your forma- tion searchingly and hurries you up. And
that instructor, clean- shaven except for a prominent forelock, who slaps his leg with that roUed-up
newspaper and at the same time gives your bags a once-over. And then other transit-prison trusties,
whom you don't recognize, penetrate your suitcases with X-ray eyes — oh, how alike they all are!
And where in your brief prisoner- transport journey have you seen them all before? Not so clean-
looking, not so well washed, but the same kind of ugly-mug swine with pitiless, bare-toothed grins?

Baaaah! These are the same blatnye, the thieves, again. Those same urki crooks, whom Leonid
Utyosov glorifies in his songs. Here again are Zhenka Zhogol, Seryoga-Zver, and Dimka Kish-
kenya, but not behind bars this time; they have been cleaned up, dressed up as representatives of the
state. And putting on airs of great importance, they see to it that discipline is observed — by us. And
if one peers into those snouts, one can even, with imagina- tion, picture that they sprang from the
same Russian roots as the rest of us — that once upon a time they were village boys whose fathers
bore such names as Klim, Prokhor, Guri, and that their general structure is even similar to our own:
two nostrils, two irises in the eyes, a rosy tongue with which to swallow food and utter certain
Russian sounds, which, however, shape totally new words.

Every chief of a transit prison has enough presence of mind to realize that he can send his relatives
back home the wages for all staff positions or else he can divvy them up with the other prison
officers. And all you have to do is whistle to get as many vol- unteers as you want from among the
socially friendly prison ele- ments to carry out all that work just in return for being allowed to cast
anchor at the transit prison and not have to go on to a mine or to the taiga. All these work-
assignment clerks, office clerks, bookkeepers, instructors, bath attendants, barbers, stockroom clerks,
cooks, dishwashers, laundresses, tailors who repair under- wear and linens — are permanent transit-
prison residents. They receive prison rations and are registered in cells, and they swipe the rest of
their soup and chow on their own out of the common food pot or out of the bundles of the transit
zeks. All these transit- prison trusties regard it as certain that they will never be better off in any
camp. We arrive in their hands still not completely plucked, and they bamboozle us to their hearts'
content. It is they and not the jailers who search us and our belongings here, and before the search
they suggest we turn in our money for safekeep- ing, and they seriously write down a list — we never



see the list or the money again. "We turned in our money." "Who to?" the officer who has arrived on
the scene asks in surprise. "Well, it was one of them." "Who exactly?" The trusties hadn't noticed
which one. "Why did you turn it over to him?" "We thought ..." "That's what the turkey thought!
Think less and you'll be better off." And that's that. They suggest we leave our things in the vestibule
to the bath: "No one's going to take them. Who needs them?" We leave them, for after all we can't
take them into the bath with us anyway. We return and there are no sweaters left and no fur-lined
mittens. "What kind of a sweater was it?" "Grayish." "Well, that means it went to the laundry." They
also take things from us honestly: in return for taking a suitcase into the storage room for
safekeeping; for putting us in a cell without the thieves; for sending us off on prisoner transports as
soon as possible; for not sending us off as long as possible. The only thing they don't do is rob us by
main force out in the open.

"But those aren't thieves!" the connoisseurs among us explain. "These are the bitches — the ones who
work for the prison. They are enemies of the honest thieves. And the honest thieves are the ones
imprisoned in cells." But somehow this is hard for our rab- bity brains to grasp. Their ways are the
same; they have the same kind of tattoos. Maybe they really are enemies of those others, but after all
they are not our friends either, that's how it is. ...

And by this time they have forced us to sit down in the yard right underneath the cell windows. The
windows all have "muz- zles" on them and you can't look in, but from inside, hoarse, friendly voices
advise: "Hey, fellows! You know what they do here? When they search you, they take away
everything loose like tea and tobacco. If you have any, toss it in here, through our window. We'll
give it back later." So what do you know? We are suckers and rabbits. Maybe they do take tea and
tobacco away. We have read about universal prisoner solidarity in all our great literature, that one
prisoner won't deceive another. The way they spoke to us was friendly. "Hey, fellows!" And so we
toss them our tobacco pouches. And the genuine pure -bred thieves on the other side catch them and
guffaw: "You Fascist stupes."

And here are the slogans with which the whole transit prison welcomes us even though they don't
actually hang them on the walls: "Don't look for justice here!" "You're going to have to hand over
everything you've got to us." "You'll have to give it all up." This is repeated to you by the jailers, the
convoy, and the thieves. You are overwhelmed by your unbearable prison term, and you are trying to
figure out how to catch your breath, while everyone around you is figuring out how to plunder you.
Every- thing works out so as to oppress the political prisoner, who is already depressed and
abandoned without all that. "You will have to give it all up." The jailer at the Gorky Transit Prison
shakes his head hopelessly; and with a sense of relief, Ans Bern- shtein gives him his officer's
greatcoat — not free, but in exchange for two onions. And why should you complain about the thieves
if you see all the jailers at Krasnaya Presnya wearing chrome- leather boots they were never issued?
They were all lifted by the thieves in the cells and then pushed to the jailers. Why complain about the
thieves if the instructor of the Cultural and Educational Department of the camp administration is a
blatnoi, a thief, him- self and writes reports on the politicals? (The Kem Transit Prison.) And how
are you ever going to get justice against the thieves in the Rostov Transit Prison when this is their
ancient native tribal den?

They say that in 1942 at the Gorky Transit Prison some officer prisoners (including Gavrilov, the
military engineer Shchebetin, and others) nonetheless rebelled, beat up the thieves, and forced them
to stay in line. But this is always regarded as a legend; did the thieves capitulate in just one of the
cells? For long? And how was it that the bluecaps allowed the socially hostile elements to beat up the
socially /nenJfy ones? And when they say that at the Kotlas Transit Prison in 1940 the thieves
started to grab money right out of the hands of the politicals lined up at the commissary, and the
politicals began to beat them up so badly that they couldn't be stopped, and the perimeter guards
entered the compound with machine guns to defend the thieves — now there's something that rings
true. That's the way it really was.



Foolish relatives! They dash about in freedom, borrow money (because they never have that kind of
money at home), and send you foodstuffs and things — the widow's last mite, but also a poisoned gift,
because it transforms you from a free though hungry person into one who is anxious and cowardly,
and it deprives you of that newly dawning enlightenment, that toughen- ing resolve, which are all
you need for your descent into the abyss. Oh, wise Gospel saying about the camel and the eye of the
needle! These material things will keep you from entering the heavenly kingdom of the liberated
spirit. And you see that others in the police van have the same kind of bags as you. "Ragbag
bastards!" the thieves have already snarled at you in the Black Maria — but there were only two of
them and there were fifty of you and so far they haven't touched you. And now they were holding us
for the second day at the Krasnaya Presnya station with our legs tucked beneath us on the dirty floor
because we were so crowded. However, none of us was observing the life going on around us,
because we were all too concerned with how to turn in our suitcases for safekeeping. Even though
we were supposed to have the right to turn in our things for safekeeping, nonetheless the only reason
the work-assignment clerks permitted us to do it was because the prison was a Moscow prison and
we ourselves hadn't yet lost our Moscow look.

What a relief — our things had been checked. (And that meant we would have to give them up not at
this transit prison but later on.) The only things left dangling from our hands were our bundles with
our ill-fated foodstuffs. Too many of us beavers had been assembled in one place. They began to
distribute us among different cells. I was shoved into a cell with that same Valentin whom I had been
with the day I signed for my OSO sentence, and who had proposed with touching sentiment that we
begin a new life in camp. It was not yet packed full. The aisle was free. There was plenty of space
under the bunks. According to the traditional arrangement, the thieves occupied the second tier of
bunks: their senior members were beside the windows, their juniors farther back. A neutral gray
mass was on the lower bunks. No one attacked us. Without looking around and without thinking
ahead, inexperienced as we were, we sat down on the asphalt floor and crawled under the bunks. We
would even be cozy there.

The bunks were low for big men to get under, and we had to slide in on our bellies, inching along the
asphalt floor. We did. And we were going to lie there quietly and talk quietly. Not a chance! In the
semidarkness, with a wordless rustling, from all sides juveniles crept up on us on all fours, like big
rats. They were still boys, some twelve-year-olds even, but the Criminal Code accepted them too.
They had already been processed through a thieves' trial, and they were continuing their
apprenticeship with the thieves here. They had been unleashed on us. They jumped us from all sides
and six pairs of hands stripped from us and wrenched from under us all our wealth. And all this took
place in total silence, with only the sound of sinister sniffing. And we were trapped: we couldn't get
up, we couldn't move. It took no more than a minute for them to seize the bundles with the fat bacon,
sugar, and bread. They were gone. We lay there feeling stupid. We had given up our food without a
fight. And we could go on lying there now, but that was utterly impossible. Creeping out awkwardly,
rear ends first, we got up from under the bunks.

Am I a coward? I had thought I wasn't one. I had pushed my way into the heat of a bombing in the
open steppe, I hadn't been afraid to drive over a trail obviously mined with antitank mines. I had
remained coolheaded when I led my battery out of encircle- ment and went back in for a damaged
command car. Why, then, at that moment didn't I grab one of those human rats and grate his rosy
face on the black asphalt? Was he too small? Well then, go for their leaders. But no. At the front we
are strengthened by some kind of supplementary awareness (and quite false, too, perhaps): is it a
sense of our military unity? The sense of being in the right place at the right time? Of duty? But in
this new situ- ation nothing is clear, there are no rules, and everything has to be learned by feel.

Getting to my feet, I turned to their senior, the pakhan, the ringleader of the thieves. All the stolen

victuals were there in front of him beside the window on the second tier of bunks: the juvenile rats
hadn't eaten a thing themselves. They were disciplined. Nature had sculpted the front part of the
ringleader's head, in bipeds usually called a face, with nausea and hate. Or perhaps it had come to be



what it was from living the life of a beast of prey. It sagged crookedly and loosely, with a low
forehead, a savage scar, and modem steel crowns on the front teeth. His little eyes were exactly large
enough to see all familiar objects and yet not take delight in the beauties of the world. He looked at
me as a boar looks at a deer, knowing he could always knock me off my feet.

He was waiting. And what did I do? Leap forward to smash my fist in that ugly mug at least once
and then go down in the aisle? Alas, I did not.

Am I a scoundrel? Until that moment I had always thought that I wasn't. But now, plundered and
humiliated, I found it offensive to get down flat on my stomach again and crawl back beneath the
bunks. And so I addressed the ringleader of the thieves indignantly and told him that since he had
taken our food away from us he might at least give us a place on the bunks. (Now just tell me, wasn't
that a natural complaint for a city dweller and an officer?)

And what happened then? The ringleader of the thieves agreed. After all, I was thereby surrendering
any claim to the fat bacon; and I was thereby recognizing his superior authority; and I was revealing
a point of view in common with his — he, too, would have driven off the weakest. And he gave
orders for two of the gray neutrals to get off the lower bunks beside the window and free a space for
us. They obeyed submissively. And we lay down in the best places. For a while we still grieved over
our loss. (The thieves paid no attention to my military breeches. They weren't their kind of uniform.
But one of the thieves was already fingering Valentin's woolen trousers. He liked them.) And it was
only at night that the reproachful whisper of our neighbors reached us: how could we ask the thieves
to help us by driving two of our own people under the bunks in our place? And only then did aware-
ness of my own meanness prick my conscience and make me blush. (And for many years thereafter I
blushed every time I remembered it.) The gray prisoners on the lower bunks were my own brothers,
58-lb, the POW's. Had I not just a short while ago sworn to assume the burden of their fate? And
then I had shunted them off under the bunks. True, they hadn't done anything to defend us against
the thieves. But why should they have fought for our fat bacon if we ourselves didn't? They had had
enough cruel rights back in POW camps to destroy their faith in decency. But they hadn't done me
any harm, and I had them.

And thus it is that we have to keep getting banged on flank and snout again and again so as to
become, in time at least, human beings, yes, human beings. . . .

But even for the newcomer whom the transit prison cracks open and shucks, it is very, very
necessary. It gives him some gradual preparation for camp life. Such a change all in one step would
be more than the heart could bear. His consciousness would be un- able to orient itself in that murk
all at once. It has to happen gradually.

Then, too, the transit prison gave the prisoner the semblance of communicating with home. It was

there he wrote the first letter he was permitted to: reporting that he hadn't been shot and, sometimes,
the direction of his prisoner transport, and these were always the first unfamiliar words home of a
man who had been plowed over by interrogation. At home they continued to re- member him as he
had been, but he would never be that person again. And that could suddenly, like a stroke of
lightning, become apparent in one or another clumsily written line. Clumsily written because, even
though letters could be sent from transit prisons, and there was a mailbox in the yard, it was
impossible to get either paper or pencils — or anything to sharpen a pencil with. However, a
makhorka wrapper or one from a sugar packet could turn up and be smoothed out, and someone in
the cell would have a pencil — and so lines would be written in an undecipherable scrawl which
would determine the family's future peace or dis- cord.

Women driven out of their minds by receiving such a letter would sometimes precipitately rush off
and try to get to their husbands at the transit prison — even though visits were never allowed and they
would have succeeded only in burdening him with things. One such woman provided, in my opinion.



the theme for a monument to all wives — and even indicated the place for it.

This was in the Kuibyshev Transit Prison in 1950. The prison was situated in a low-lying area (from
which, however, the Zhiguli Gates of the Volga River could be seen). And right above the prison,
bordering it on the east, rose a high, long, grassy hill. It was outside the camp compound and above
it; and from the in- side and down below we couldn't see the approach to it. Very rarely did anyone
ever appear up there, although sometimes goats were pastured there or children played. And one
cloudy summer day a city woman appeared on its ridge. Shading her eyes with her hand and barely
moving, she began to scan our compound from above. At the time, three heavily populated cells
were taking their outdoor walk in three separate exercise yards — and there in the abyss among those
three hundred depersonalized ants she hoped to catch sight of her man! Did she hope that her heart
would tell her which one he was? In all probability they had re- fused to allow her a visit with him
and so she had climbed that hill. Everyone noticed her from the courtyards and everyone stared at
her. Down below in the hollow there was no wind, but it was blowing hard up above. It made her
long dress, her jacket, and her long hair stream out and billow, expressing all that love and anxiety
which possessed her.

I think that a statue of such a woman, right there on that spot, on the hill overlooking the transit
prison, with her face to the Zhiguli Gates, just as she actually stood, might explain at least a little
something to our grandchildren.

[After all, someday the hidden and all but lost story of our Archipelago will be portrayed in
monuments too! And I visualize, for example, one more such project: somewhere on a high point in
the Kolyma, a most enormous Stalin, just such a size as he himself dreamed of, with mustaches
many feet long and the bared fangs of a camp commandant, one hand holding the reins and the other
wielding a knout with which to beat his team of hundreds of people harnessed in fives and all pulling
hard. This would also be a fine sight on the edge of the Chukchi Peninsula next to the Bering Strait.
(I had written this before I read "The Bas-Relief on the Cliff." And that means there is something to
the idea. They say that on Mogutova Hill at the Zhiguli Gates on the Volga, a mile from the camp,
there used to be an enormous oil portrait of Stalin which had been painted on the cliff for the benefit
of passing steamers.)]

She was there for a long time and they didn't drive her off, probably because the guards were too
lazy to climb the hill. But finally a soldier climbed up and began to shout and wave his hands at
her — and chased her away.

The transit prison also gives the prisoner some kind of over-all view, some breadth of outlook. As
they say: even though there's nothing to eat, still it's a gay life. In the incessant traffic here, in the
comings and goings of dozens and hundreds of people, in the frankness of the stories and
conversations (in camp they don't talk so freely because they are always afraid there of stepping into
the trap of the Oper, the Security officer), you are refreshed, you are aired out, you become more
lucid, and you begin to un- derstand better what is happening to you, to your people, even to the
world. Even one single eccentric who turns up in your cell can tell you things you'll never in your
life read about.

All of a sudden they introduce into the cell some kind of miracle: a tall young military man with a
Roman profile, curly and undipped flaxen locks, in a British uniform — just as if he had come straight
from the Normandy landing, an officer of the invading army. He enters as proudly as if he expected
everyone to rise to their feet in his presence. And it turns out that he had simply not expected to be
among friends at this point: he had already been imprisoned for two years, but he had never yet been
in a cell and he had been brought secretly, right to the transit prison itself, in an individual Stolypin
compartment. And then, unexpectedly, either by mistake or else with special intent, he had been
admitted to our common stable. He looked around the cell, saw a Wehrmacht officer there in
German uniform, and started to argue with him in German; and there they were arguing heatedly.



ready, it seemed, to resort to weapons if they'd had any. Five years had passed since the war, and it
had been drummed into us that in the West the war had been waged only for the sake of appearances,
and to us it was strange to observe their mutual outrage: the German had been with us for a long
time, and we Russians hadn't argued with him; for the most part we had laughed with him.

No one would have believed the story of Erik Arvid Andersen had it not been for his unshorn
locks — a miracle unique in all Gulag. And that foreign bearing of his. And his fluent English,
German, and Swedish speech. According to him he was the son of a rich Swede — not merely a
millionaire but a billionaire. (Well, let's assume he embellished a little.) On his mother's side he was
a nephew of the British General Robertson, who commanded the British Zone in occupied Germany.
A Swedish subject, he had served as a volunteer in the British Army and had actually landed in
Normandy, and after the war he had become a Swedish career officer. However, the investigation of
social systems remained one of his principal interests. His thirst for socialism was stronger than his
attachment to his father's capital. He looked upon Soviet socialism with feelings of profound
sympathy, and he had even had the chance to become convinced of its flourishing state with his own
eyes when he had come to Moscow as a member of a Swedish military delegation. They had been
given banquets and taken to country homes and there they had encountered no obstacles at all to
establishing contact with ordinary Soviet citizens — with pretty actresses who for some reason never
had to rush off to work and who willingly spent time with them, even tete-a-tete. And thus convinced
once and for all of the triumph of our social system, Erik on his return to the West wrote articles in
the press defending and praising Soviet socialism. And this proved to be his undoing. In those very
years, in 1947 and 1948, they were roping in from all sorts of nooks and crannies progres- sive
young Westerners prepared to renounce the West publicly (and it appeared that if they could only
have collected another dozen or so the West would shudder and collapse). Erik's news- paper articles
caused him to be regarded as suitable for this category. At the time he was serving in West Berlin,
and he had left his wife in Sweden. And out of pardonable male weakness he used to visit an
unmarried German girl in East Berlin. And it was there that he was bound and gagged one night (and
is not this the significance of the proverb which says: "He went to see his cousin, and he ended up in
prison"? This had probably been going on for a long time, and he wasn't the first). They took him to
Moscow, where Gromyko, who had once dined at his father's home in Stockholm and who knew the
son also, not only returned the hospitality but proposed to the young man that he renounce publicly
both capitalism and his own father. And in return he was promised full and complete capitalist
maintenance to the end of his days here in our country. But to Gromyko's surprise, although Erik
would not have suffered any material loss, he became in- dignant and uttered some very insulting
words. Since they didn't believe in his strength of mind, they locked him up in a dacha outside
Moscow, fed him like a prince in a fairy tale (sometimes they used "awful methods of repression" on
him: they refused to accept his orders for the following day's menu and instead of the spring chicken
he ordered they simply brought him a steak, just like that), surrounded him with the works of Marx-
Engels-Lenin- Stalin, and waited a year for him to be re-educated. To their sur- prise it didn't happen.
At that point they quartered with him a former lieutenant general who had already served two years
in Norilsk. They probably calculated that by relating the horrors of camp the lieutenant general
would persuade Erik to surrender.

But either he carried out that assignment badly or else he didn't want to carry it out. After ten months
of their being imprisoned together, the only thing he had taught Erik was broken Russian, and he had
bolstered Erik's growing repugnance for the bluecaps. In the summer of 1950 they once more
summoned Erik to Vyshin- sky and he once more refused (in so doing, he made existence contingent
on consciousness, thereby violating all the Marxist- Leninist rules!). And then Abakumov himself
read Erik the decree: twenty years in prison (what for???). They themselves already regretted having
gotten mixed up with this ignoramus, but at the same time they couldn't release him and let him go
back to the West. And so they transported him in a separate compart- ment, and it was there that he
had heard the story of the Moscow girl through the partition and seen through the train window in
the dawn light the rotting straw -thatched roofs of the age-old Russia of Ryazan.



Those two years had very strongly confirmed him in his loyahy to the West. He believed blindly in
the West. He did not want to recognize its weaknesses. He considered Western armies unbeatable
and Western political leaders faultless. He refused to believe us when we told him that during the
period of his im- prisonment Stalin had begun a blockade of Berlin and had gotten away with it
perfectly well. Erik's milky neck and creamy cheeks blushed with indignation whenever we ridiculed
Churchill and Roosevelt. And he was also certain that the West would not countenance his, Erik's,
imprisonment; that on the basis of in- formation from the Kuibyshev Transit Prison the Western
Intel- ligence services would immediately learn that Erik had not drowned in the Spree River but had
been imprisoned in the Soviet Union — and either he would be ransomed or someone would be
exchanged for him. (This faith of his in the individual importance of his own fate among other
prisoners' fates was reminiscent of our own well-intentioned orthodox Soviet Communists.) Not-
withstanding our heated arguments, he invited my friend and me to Stockholm whenever we could
come. ("Everyone knows us there," he said with a tired smile. "My father virtually maintains the
Swedish King's whole court.") For the time being, however, the son of the bilUonaire had nothing to
dry himself with, and I presented him with an extra tattered towel as a gift. And soon they took him
away on a prisoner transport.

[Since that time I have asked Swedes I have met or travelers going to Sweden how to find his family.
Have they heard anything about such a missing person? The only reply I have received is a smile.
The name Andersen in Sweden is like Ivanov in Russia — and there is no such billionaire. And it is
only now, twenty-two years later, rereading this book for the last time, that I have suddenly realized:
of course, they must have forbidden him to give his real name! He must have been warned by
Abakumov, of course, that he would be destroyed if he did. And so he traveled through the transit
prisons in the guise of a Swedish Ivanov. And it was only through unforbidden, sec- ondary details
of his biography that he was able to leave behind in the memories of those he encountered by chance
some trace of his ruined life. More likely he still thought it could be saved — which was only
human — like millions of other rabbits in this book. He thought he would be imprisoned for a while
and that thereupon the indignant West would free him. He did not understand the strength of the
East. And he did not understand that such a witness as himself, who had displayed such firmness of
will, unheard of in the soft West, could never be released.

Yet perhaps he is still alive even today. (Author's note, 1972.)]

And the movement of people was endless. Prisoners were brought in and taken away, singly and in
groups, and driven off in prisoner transports. Appearing so businesslike on the surface, so planned,
this movement was marked by such stupidity that one can hardly believe it.

In 1949 the Special Camps were created. And then and there, on the basis of some summit decision,
masses of women were driven from camps in the European North and the Trans-Volga area, through
the Sverdlovsk Transit Prison, to Siberia, to Taishet, to Ozerlag. But in 1950 someone found it
convenient to assemble all the women not in Ozerlag, but in Dubrovlag — in Temnikov, in
Mordvinia. And so all those same women, enjoying all the conveniences of Gulag travel, were
dragged through this same Sverdlovsk Transit Prison — to the west. In 1951 new Special Camps were
set up in Kemerovo Province (Kamyshlag) — and that turned out to be where the women's labor was
required. And those ill-fated women were again put to the torment of being sent to the Kemerovo
camps through that same accursed Sverdlovsk Transit Prison. The time came for liberation — but not
for all of them. All those women who were left to drag out their terms in the midst of the general
Khrushchev relaxation were once again swung out of Siberia through the Sverdlovsk Transit
Prison — into Mordvinia: it was thought better to have them all together.

Well, after all, we have our own self-contained economy. The isles are all our own. And the
distances aren't so very great for a Russian.

And the same sort of thing happened to individual zeks, the more unfortunate ones. Shendrik was a



big, merry, open-faced fellow, and he labored honestly, as they say, in one of the Kuibyshev camps
and had no intimation of the evil fate over- taking him. But this evil fate struck nonetheless. An
urgent order arrived at the camp — not just from anybody but from the Minister of Internal Affairs
himself! (And how could the Minister know of Shendrik's existence?) The order was to deliver this
Shendrik to Prison No. 18 in Moscow immediately. They grabbed him, dragged him off to the
Kuibyshev Transit Prison, and from there to Moscow with no delay. But not to some Prison No. 18;
instead, with all the rest, he went to the widely known Krasnaya Presnya Prison. (Shendrik didn't
know about any Prison No. 18. No one had told him.) But his misfortune did not drowse. No more
than two days had passed before they jerked him onto a prisoner trans- port again and this time took
him all the way to Pechora. The landscape outside the train window grew ever sparser and grim-
mer. Shendrik was alarmed: he knew there was an order from the Minister, and here they were
rapidly hauling him off to the North, and that meant that the Minister had some awful evidence
against him. In addition to all the other torments of the trip, they stole three days of bread rations
from him while he was en route. And by the time he got to Pechora he was staggering. Pechora
greeted him inhospitably. They drove him out to work in the wet snow, hungry and unsettled. In two
days he never had a chance to dry out his shirts nor even a chance to stuff his mattress with pine
needles. And right then they ordered him to turn in everything he had that was government issue and
once again they scooped him up and whisked him still farther — to Vorkuta. It seemed quite evident
from everything that had happened that the Minister was determined to destroy Shendrik, and not
him alone but the entire group in his prisoner transport. At Vorkuta they didn't touch Shendrik for a
whole month. He went out to general-assignment work, even though he had not yet recovered from
his travels, but he had begun to reconcile himself to his Arctic fate. And then suddenly one day they
called him out of the mine, and chased him off breathless to the camp to turn in everything he had
that was government issue, and in one hour's time he was being carried off to the south. Now by this
time it had already begun to smell of personal vengeance! They took him to Moscow Prison No. 18.
They held him in the cell there for one month. And then he was summoned to some lieutenant
colonel who asked him: "Where the hell have you been? Are you really a mechanical engineer?"
And Shendrik confessed that he was. And then they took him off to none other than, yes, the
Paradise Islands! (Yes, there are such islands in the Archipelago!)

This coming and going of people, these destinies, and these stories greatly enliven the transit prisons.

And the old camp veterans advise newcomers: Lie down and take it easy. They feed you the
guaranteed minimum here, and you don't have to tire your back.

[The rations guaranteed by Gulag when no work is being done.]

And when it's not crowded you can sleep as much as you want to. So just stretch out and lie there
from one handout of gruel to the next. The food is sparse, but the sleeping is good. Only those who
know what general-assignment work is in the camps will understand that a transit prison is a rest
home, a hap- piness on our path. And one more advantage too: when you sleep in the daytime the
hours pass more quickly. If you can just kill off the day, the night will go away on its own.

True, recalling that labor created the human being and that only labor can reform the criminal, and
sometimes having aux- iliary projects, and sometimes acting as subcontractors in order to keep up
their financial end, the bosses of transit prisons might sometimes even drive their loafing transit
manpower out to labor.

The work at that same Kotlas Transit Prison before the war was not the least bit easier than in a
regular camp. In the course of a winter day six or seven weakened prisoners were harnessed to a
tractor (!) sledge and had to drag it seven miles along the Dvina River to the mouth of the Vychegda.
They got stuck in snow and fell down, and the sledges got stuck. And it would seem that any work
more wearing and debilitating could hardly have been thought up! But it turned out that this wasn't
the actual work, but merely the warm-up. There at the mouth of the Vychegda, they had to load
thirteen cubic yards of firewood on the sledges — and the same people harnessed in the same way



(Repin is no longer with us, and this is no subject for our new artists; it is merely a crude
reproduction from nature) had to haul the sledges back to their transit-prison home. Now what does a
camp have to offer after that! You wouldn't even survive to get there. (The work-brigade leader for
that task was Kolupayev, and the work horses were electrical engineer Dmitriyev, quartermaster
corps Lieutenant Colonel Belyayev, and Vasily Vlasov, who is already familiar to us; but not all the
other names can be col- lected at this date.)

During the war the Arzamas Transit Prison fed its prisoners beet tops and at the same time put them
to work on a permanent basis. There were garment shops, a footgear-felting shop (where woolen
fibers were fulled in hot water and acids).

In the summer of 1945 we went out of the stiflingly stagnant cells of Krasnaya Presnya to work as
volunteers: for the right to breathe air the whole day long; for the right to sit unhurried and
unhindered in a quiet plank latrine (an incentive that is often overlooked!) heated by the August sun
(and these were the days of Potsdam and Hiroshima), listening to the peaceful buzzing of a lonely
bee; and, last, for the right to get an extra quarter-pound of bread at night. They took us to the
wharves of the Moscow River, where timber was being unloaded. It was our job to roll the logs off
some of the piles, carry them over and stack them in other piles. We spent a good deal more strength
than we received extra food in compensation. Nonetheless we enjoyed going out to work there.

I often have to blush at my recollections of my younger years (and that's where my younger years
were spent!). But whatever casts you down also teaches you a lot. And it turned out that as a residue
of the officer's shoulder boards, which had trembled and fluttered on my shoulders for two years in
all, some kind of poisonous golden dust had settled in the empty space between my ribs. On that
river wharf, which was a camplet too, there was also a compound with watchtowers surrounding it.
We were merely transient, temporary work sloggers, and there had been no talk at all, no rumor, that
we might be allowed to stay and serve out our terms there. But when they formed us up for the first
time, and the work-assignment foreman looked down the line to pick out temporary work-brigade
leaders, my worthless heart was bursting under my woolen field shirt: Me, me, pick me!

I was not chosen. But why did I want it? I would only have made further shameful mistakes.

Oh, how hard it is to part with power! This one has to under- stand.

There was a time when Krasnaya Presnya became the virtual capital of Gulag — in the sense that no
matter where you went, you couldn't bypass it, just like Moscow. Just as when one travels in the
Soviet Union it is more convenient to proceed from Tash- kent to Sochi and from Chernigov to
Minsk via Moscow, they dragged the prisoners there from all over and sent them off all over via
Presnya. And that was the way it was when I was there. Presnya was at the point of breakdown from
overcrowding. They built a supplementary building. Only the through trains of cattle cars carrying
those who had been sentenced right at counterintel- ligence bypassed Moscow on the circle line
around it, which, as it happened, went right past Presnya, perhaps even saluting it with a whistle on
the way.

But we do have a ticket when we come to Moscow as free passengers in transit, and we hope sooner
or later to proceed in the desired direction. At Presnya at the end of the war and just after, not only
the prisoners who arrived there but even the very highest-ranking officials and even the heads of
Gulag itself were unable to predict who would proceed where. At that time the prison system had not
yet crystallized as it had by the fifties, and there were no routes and no destinations were indicated
for any- body — except perhaps for service instructions: "Keep under strict guard"; "To be employed
only on general-assignment work." The convoy sergeants carried the bundles of prison cases, torn
folders tied somehow with twine or ersatz cotton string made of paper, into a separate wooden
building that housed the prison offices, and tossed them onto shelves, on tables, under tables, under
chairs, and simply on the floor in the aisle (just as their subject prisoners lay in the cells). They



became untied and got scattered and mixed up. One room, a second, and a third got filled with those
mixed-up cases. Secretaries from the prison office, well-fed, lazy, free women in bright-colored
dresses, sweated in the heat, fanned themselves and flirted with prison and convoy officers. None of
them wanted to or had the strength to pick a way through that chaos. And yet the trainloads had to be
dispatched in the red trains — several times a week. And every day a hundred people had to be sent
out on trucks to nearby camps. The case of every zek had to be sent with him. So just who was going
to work on all that long-drawn-out mess? Who was there to sort out the cases and select the prisoners
for the transports?

It was entrusted to several work-assignment supervisors from among the transit-prison trusties — who
were either "bitches " or "half-breeds. "

["Half-breeds" or "mulattoes" (polutsvetnye in Russian) were prisoners who had grown spiritually
close to the thieves and tried to imitate them, but who had nonetheless not been accepted by the
thieves' law.]

They moved freely through the prison corridors, entered the prison office, and were the ones who
decided whether your case would be put in a bad prisoner transport or whether they would really
exert themselves, search long and hard, and put it in a good one. (The newcomers were not mistaken
in thinking that there were whole camps which were death camps, and they were right about that, but
their idea that there were some that were "good" was simply a delusion. There were no good camps,
but only certain easier duties within them — and they could only be sorted out on the spot.) The fact
that the prisoner's whole future depended on such another prisoner, with whom one ought perhaps to
find the chance to talk (even if via the bath attendant), and whose hand one ought perhaps to grease
(even if via the storage room keeper), was worse than if his fortunes had simply been determined
blindly by a roll of the dice. This invisible and unrealized opportunity — to go south to Nalchik
instead of north to Norilsk in return for a leather jacket, to go to Serebryanny Bor outside Moscow
instead of Taishet in Siberia for a couple of pounds of fat bacon (and perhaps to lose both the leather
jacket and the fat bacon for nothing at all) — only aggravated and fatigued tired souls. Maybe
someone did manage to arrange it, maybe someone got himself fixed up that way, but most blessed
of all were those who had nothing to give or who spared themselves all that anxiety.

Submissiveness to fate, the total abdication of your own will in the shaping of your life, the
recognition that it was impossible to guess the best and the worst ahead of time but that it was easy
to take a step you would reproach yourself for — all this freed the prisoner from any bondage, made
him calmer, and even ennobled him.

And thus it was that the prisoners lay in rows in the cells, and their fates lay in undisturbed piles in
the rooms of the prison office. And the assignment supervisors took the files from the par- ticular
corner where it was easiest to get at them. And some zeks had to spend two or three months gasping
in this accursed Presnya while others would whiz through it with the speed of a shooting star. As a
result of all that congestion, haste, and disorder with the cases, sometimes sentences got switched at
Presnya (and at other transit prisons as well). This didn't affect the 58's, because their prison terms,
in Maxim Gorky's phrase, were "Terms" with a capital letter, were intended to be long, and even
when they seemed to be nearing their end they just never got there anyway.

But it made sense for big thieves and murderers to switch with some stupid nonpolitical offender.
And so they or their accom- plices would inch up to such an individual and question him with
interest and concern. And he, not knowing that a short-termer at a transit prison isn't supposed to
disclose anything about him- self, would innocently tell them that his name was, for example, Vasily
Parfenych Yevrashkin, that he was bom in 1913, that he lived in Semidubye and had been bom
there. And his term was one year. Article 109, "Negligence." And then Yevrashkin was asleep or
maybe not even asleep, but there was such a racket in the cell and there was such a crowd at the swill
trough in the door that he couldn't make his way there and listen, while on the other side of it in the



corridor they were rapidly muttering a list of names for a prisoner transport. Some of the names were
shouted from the door into the cell, but not Yevrashkin's because hardly had the name been read out
in the corridor than an urka, a thief, had obsequiously (and they can be obsequious when it's neces-
sary) shoved up his snout and answered quickly and quietly: "Vasily Parfenych, bom 1913, village
of Semidubye, 109, one year," and ran off to get his things. The real Yevrashkin yawned, lay back on
his bunk, and patiently waited to be called the next day, and the next week, and the next month, and
then he made so bold as to bother the prison superintendent: why hadn't he been taken in a prisoner
transport? (And every day in all the cells they kept calling out the name of some Zvyaga.) And when
a month later or a half-year later they got around to combing through all the cases by calling the roll,
what they had left was just one file — belonging to Zvyaga, a multiple offender, sentenced for a
double murder and robbing a store, ten years — and one shy prisoner who was trying to tell
everybody that he was Yevrashkin, although you couldn't make anything out from the photo, and so
he damn well was Zvyaga and he had to be tucked away in a penalty camp, Ivdellag — because
otherwise it would have been necessary to confess that the transit prison had made a mistake.

(And as for that other Yevrashkin who had been sent off on a prisoner transport, you wouldn't even

be able to find where he had gone — because none of the lists were left. And anyway he had only had
a one-year term and had been sent to do farm work with- out being under guard and got three days
off his sentence for every day he worked, or else he had simply run away, and was long since home
or, more likely, was already imprisoned again on a new sentence.) There were also eccentrics who
sold their short terms for a kilo or two of fat bacon. They figured that in any case the authorities
would check up and establish their correct identities. And sometimes they did.

[And, as P. Yakubovich writes in reference to the so-called "cadgers," the sale of prison terms took
place in the last century too. It is an ancient prison trick.]

During the years when the prisoners' cases didn't carry any indication of their final destination, the
transit prisons turned into slave markets. The most desired guests at the transit prisons were the
buyers. This word was heard more and more often in the corridors and cells and was used without
any shadow of irony. Just as it became intolerable everywhere in industry simply to sit and wait until
things were sent from the center on the basis of allocations, and it was more satisfactory to send
one's own "pushers" and "pullers" to get things done — the same thing hap- pened in Gulag: the
natives on the islands kept dying off; and even though they cost not one ruble, a count was kept of
them, and one had to worry about getting more of them for oneself so there wouldn't be any failure
in fulfilling the plan. The buyers had to be sharp, have good eyes, and look carefully to see what they
were taking so that last-leggers and invalids didn't get shoved off on them. The buyers who picked a
transport on the basis of case files were poor buyers. The conscientious merchants de- manded that
the merchandise be displayed alive and bare-skinned for them to inspect. And that was just what
they used to say — without smiling — merchandise. "Well, what merchandise have you brought?"
asked a buyer at the Butyrki station, observing and inspecting the female attributes of seventeen-
year-old Ira Kalina.

Human nature, if it changes at all, changes not much faster than the geological face of the earth. And
the very same sensa- tions of curiosity, relish, and sizing up which slave-traders felt at the slave-girl
markets twenty-five centuries ago of course pos- sessed the Gulag bigwigs in the Usman Prison in
1947, when they, a couple of dozen men in MVD uniform, sat at several desks covered with sheets
(this was for their self-importance, since it would have seemed awkward otherwise), and all the
women prisoners were made to undress in the box next door and to walk in front of them bare-footed
and bare-skinned, turn around, stop, and answer questions. "Drop your hands," they ordered those
who had adopted the defensive pose of classic sculpture. (After all, these officers were very seriously
selecting bedmates for them- selves and their colleagues.)

And so it was that for the new prisoner various manifestations foreshadowed the camp battle of the
morrow and cast their pall over the innocent spiritual joys of the transit prison.



For just two nights they put a special-assignment prisoner in our cell in Krasnaya Presnya. And he
was next to me in the bunk. He traveled about with special-assignment orders, which meant that an
invoice had been filled out in Central Administration in- dicating that he was a construction
technician and could be used only in that capacity in his new location, and this went with him from
camp to camp. The special-assignment prisoner was travel- ing in the common Stolypin cars and was
kept in the common cells of the transit prisons, but he wasn't nervous; he was pro- tected by his
personal document, and he wouldn't be driven out to fell timber. A cruel and determined expression
was the prin- cipal trait of this camp veteran's face. He had already served out the greater part of his
term. (And I did not yet realize that this exact expression would in time etch itself on all our faces,
because a cruel and determined expression is the national hallmark of the Gulag islanders. People
with soft, conciliatory expressions die out quickly on the islands.) He observed our naive floundering
with an ironic smile, just as people look at two-week-old puppies.

What should we expect in camp? Taking pity on us, he taught us:

"From your very first step in camp everyone will try to deceive and plunder you. Trust no one but
yourself. Look around quickly: someone may be sneaking up on you to bite you. Eight years ago I
arrived at KargopoUag just as innocent and just as naive as you are now. They unloaded us from two
trains, and the convoy pre- pared to lead us the six miles to the camp through the deep, crumbly
snow. Three sleds came up beside us. Some hefty chap whom the convoy didn't interfere with came
over to us and said: 'Brothers, put your things on the sleds and we will carry them there for you.' We
remembered reading in books that prisoners' belongings were carried on carts. And we thought: It
isn't going to be all that inhuman in camp; they are concerned about us. And we loaded our things on
the sleds. They left. And we never saw them again, not even an empty wrapper."

"But how can that happen? Isn't there any law there?"

"Don't ask idiotic questions. There is a law there. The law of the taiga, of the jungle. But as for

justice — there never has been any in Gulag and there never will be. That Kargopol incident was
simply a symbol of Gulag. And you have to get used to some- thing else too: in camp no one ever
does anything for nothing, no one ever does anything out of the generosity of his heart. You have to
pay for everything. If someone proposes something to you that is unselfish, disinterested, you can be
sure it's a dirty trick, a provocation. The main thing is: avoid general-assignment work. Avoid it
from the day you arrive. If you land in general- assignment work that first day, then you are lost, and
this time for keeps."

"General-assignment work?"

"General-assignment work — that is the main and basic work performed in any given camp. Eighty
percent of the prisoners work at it, and they all die off. All. And then they bring new ones in to take
their places and they again are sent to general-assign- ment work. Doing this work, you expend the
last of your strength. And you are always hungry. And always wet. And shoeless. And you are given
short rations and short everything else. And put in the worst barracks. And they won't give you any
treatment when you're ill. The only ones who survive in camps are those who try at any price not to
be put on general-assignment work. From the first day."

"At any price?"

"At any price!"

At Krasnaya Presnya I assimilated and accepted this alto- gether unexaggerated advice of the cruel
special-assignment pris- oner, forgetting only to ask him one thing: How do you measure that price?
How high do you go?



Chapter 3

The Slave Caravans

It was painful to travel in a Stolypin, unbearable in a Black Maria, and the transit prison would soon
wear you down — and it might just be better to skip the whole lot and go straight to camp in the red
cattle cars.

As always, the interests of the state and the interests of the individual coincided here. It was also to
the state's advantage to dispatch sentenced prisoners straight to the camps by direct routing and thus
avoid overloading the city trunk-line railroads, automotive transport, and transit-camp personnel.
They had long since grasped this fact in Gulag, and it had been taken to heart: witness the caravans
of red cows (red cattle cars), the caravans of barges, and, where there were no rails and no water, the
cara- vans on foot (after all, prisoners could not be allowed to exploit the labor of horses and
camels).

The red trains were always a help when the courts in some particular place were working swiftly or
the transit facilities were overcrowded. It was possible in this way to dispatch a large number of
prisoners in one batch. That is how the millions of peasants were transported in 1929-1931. That is
how they exiled Leningrad from Leningrad. That is how they populated the Kolyma in the thirties:
every day Moscow, the capital of our country, belched out one such train to Sovetskaya Gavan, to
Vanino Port. And each provincial capital also sent oft' red train- loads, but not on a daily schedule.
That is how they removed the Volga German Republic to Kazakhstan in 1941, and later all the rest
of the exiled nations were sent off in the same way. In 1945 Russia's prodigal sons and daughters
were sent from Ger- many, from Czechoslovakia, from Austria, and simply from west- em border
areas — whoever had gotten there on his own — in such trains as these. In 1949 that is how they
collected the 58's in Special Camps.

The Stolypins follow routine railroad schedules. And the red trains travel on imposing waybills,
signed by important Gulag generals. The Stolypins cannot go to an empty site, to "nowhere"; their
destination must always be a station, even if it's in some nasty little two-bit town with some
preliminary detention cells in an attic. But the red trains can go into emptiness: and wherever one
does go, there immediately rises right next to it, out of the sea of the steppe or the sea of the taiga, a
new island of the Archi- pelago.

Not every red cattle car is ready as is to transport prisoners. First it has to be prepared. But not in the
sense some of our readers might expect: that the coal or lime it carried before it was assigned to
carry people has to be swept out and the car cleaned — that isn't always done. Nor in the sense that it
needs to be calked and have a stove installed if it is winter. (When the section of the railroad from
Knyazh-Pogost to Ropcha was being built and wasn't yet part of the general railroad network, they
immediately began to transport prisoners on it — in freight cars without either stoves or bunks. In
winter the zeks lay on the icy, snowy floor and weren't even given any hot food, because the train
could make it all the way through this section in less than a day. Whoever can in imagination lie
there like them and survive those eighteen to twenty hours shall indeed survive!) Here is what was
involved in preparing a red cattle car for prisoners: The floors, walls, and ceilings had to be tested for
strength and checked for holes or faults. Their small windows had to be barred. A hole had to be cut
in the floor to serve as a drain, and specially protected by sheet iron firmly nailed down all around it.
The necessary number of platforms on which convoy guards would stand with machine guns had to
be evenly distributed throughout the train, and if there were too few, more had to be built. Access to
the roofs of the cars had to be provided. Sites for searchlights had to be selected and supplied with
uninterrupted electric power. Long-handled wooden mallets had to be procured. A passenger car had
to be hooked on for the staff, and if there wasn't one, then instead heated freight cars had to be
prepared for the chief of convoy, the Security officer, and the convoy. Kitchens had to be built — for
the convoy and for the prisoners. And only after all this had been done was it all right to walk along
the cattle cars and chalk on the sides: "Special Equipment" or "Perishable Goods." (In her chapter.



"The Seventh Car," Yevgeniya Ginz- burg described a transport of red cars very vividly, and her de-
scription largely obviates the necessity of presenting details here.)

The preparation of the train has been completed — and ahead lies the complicated combat operation
of loading the prisoners into the cars. At this point there are two important and obligatory objectives:

• to conceal the loading from ordinary citizens

• to terrorize the prisoners

To conceal the loading from the local population was necessary because approximately a thousand
people were being loaded on the train simultaneously (at least twenty-five cars)," and this wasn't
your little group from a Stolypin that could be led right past the townspeople. Everyone knew, of
course, that arrests were being made every day and every hour, but no one was to be horrified by the
sight of large numbers of them together. In Orel in 1938 you could hardly hide the fact that there was
no home in the city where there hadn't been arrests, and weeping women in their peasant carts
blocked the square in front of the Orel Prison just as in Surikov's painting The Execution of the
Streltsy. (Oh, who one day will paint this latter-day tragedy for us? But no one will. It's not
fashionable, not fashionable. . . .) But you don't need to show our Soviet people an entire trainload of
them col- lected in one day. (And in Orel that year there were.) And young people mustn't see it
either — for young people are our future. Therefore it was done only at night — and every night, too,
each and every night, and that was the way it went for several months. The black line of prisoners to
be transported was driven from the prison to the station on foot. (Meanwhile the Black Marias were
busy making new arrests.) True, the women realized, the women somehow found out, and at night
they came to the station from all over the city and kept watch over the trains on the siding. They ran
along the cars, tripping over the ties and rails, and shouting at every car: "Is So-and-so in there?" "Is
So-and-so in there?" And they ran on to the next one, and others ran up to this one: "Is So-and-so in
there?" And suddenly an answer would come from the sealed car: 'T'm in here. I'm here!" Or else:
"Keep looking for him. He's in another car." Or else: "Women! Listen! My wife is somewhere out
there, near the station. Run and tell her."

These scenes, unworthy of our contemporary world, testify only to the then inept organization of
train embarkations. The mistakes were noted, and after a certain night the trains were surrounded in
depth by cordons of snarling and barking police dogs.

And in Moscow, the loading into red cattle cars from the old Sretenka Transit Prison (which
prisoners no longer remember) or from Krasnaya Presnya took place only at night; that was the rule.

However, although the convoy had no use for the superfluous light of the sun by day, on the other
hand they made use of suns by night — the searchlights. They were more efficient since they could be
concentrated on the necessary area, where the prisoners were seated on the earth in a frightened pack
awaiting the com- mand: "Next unit of five — stand up! To the car — on the run!" (Only on the run, so
as not to have time to look around, to think things over, to run as though chased by the dogs, afraid
of noth- ing so much as falling down.) On that uneven path. Up the load- ing ramp, scrambling. And
clear, hostile searchlight beams not only provided light but were an important theatrical element in
terrorizing the prisoners, along with yells, threats, gunstock blows, on those who fell behind, and the
order: "Sit down." (And some- times, as in the station square of that same Orel: "Down on your
knees." And like some new breed of believers at prayer, the whole thousand would get down on their
knees.) Along with that running to the car, quite unnecessary except for intimidation — for which it
was very important. Along with the enraged barking of the dogs. Along with the leveled gun barrels
(rifles or auto- matic pistols, depending on the decade). And the main thing was to undermine, to
crush the prisoner's will power so he wouldn't think of trying to escape, so that for a long time he
wouldn't notice his new advantage: the fact that he had exchanged a stone- walled prison for a
railroad car with thin plank walls.



But in order to load one thousand prisoners into railroad cars at night so precisely, the prison had to
start jerking them out of their cells and processing them for transport the morning before, and the
convoy had to spend the entire day on a long-drawn-out and strict procedure of checking them in
while still in prison and then holding those who'd been checked in for long hours, not, of course, in
the cells by now, but in the courtyard, on the ground, so as not to mix them up with the prisoners still
belonging in the prison. Thus for the prisoner the loading at night was only a relief after a whole day
of torment.

Besides the ordinary counts, verifications, hair clipping, cloth- ing roasting, and baths, the core of the
preparation for the pri- soner transport was general /n^/czn^. This search was carried out not by the
prison but by the convoy receiving the prisoners. The convoy was expected, in accordance with the
directives re- garding the red transports and in accordance with their own operational requirements,
to carry out this search so that the prisoners would not be left in possession of anything that might
help them to escape; to take away: everything that could saw or cut; all powders (tooth powder,
sugar, salt, tobacco, tea) so they could not be used to blind the convoy; all string, cord, twine, belts,
and straps because they could all be used in escaping (and that meant all kinds of straps! and so they
cut off the straps which held up the artificial limb of a one-legged man — and the cripple had to carry
his artificial leg on his shoulder and hop with the help of those on either side of him). The rest of the
things — all "valuables" and suitcases too — were, according to instructions, supposed to be checked
and carried in a special baggage car and returned to their owners at the end of the journey.

Yet the power of the Moscow directive was weak and might be ignored by the Vologda or the
Kuibyshev convoy, while the power of the convoy over the prisoners was very corporeal, very real.
And this fact was crucial to the third objective of the load- ing operation:

• in simple justice to take all the good things they possess from enemies of the people for the use of
its sons

"Sit down." "On your knees!" "Strip!" In these statutory orders of the convoy lay the basic power one
could not argue with. After all, a naked person loses his self-assurance. He cannot straighten up
proudly and speak as an equal to people who are still clothed. A search begins. (Kuibyshev, summer
of 1949.) Naked prisoners approach, carrying their possessions and the clothes they've taken off. A
mass of armed soldiers surrounds them. It doesn't look as though they are going to be led to a
prisoner transport but as though they are going to be shot immediately or put to death in a gas
chamber — and in that mood a human being ceases to concern himself with his possessions. The
convoy does every- thing with intentional brusqueness, rudely, sharply, not speaking one word in an
ordinary human voice. After all, the purpose is to terrify and dishearten. Suitcases are shaken apart,
and things fall all over the floor and are then stacked up in separate piles. Ciga- rette cases, billfolds,
and other pitiful "valuables" are all taken away and thrown without any identifying marks into a
barrel that is standing nearby. (And, for some reason, the fact that this particular receptacle isn't a
safe, or a trunk, or a box, but a barrel particularly depresses the naked prisoners there, and it seems
so terribly futile to protest.) The naked prisoner has all he can do simply to snatch up his well-
searched rags from the floor and knot them together or tie them up in a blanket. Felt boots? You can
check them, throw them over there, sign for them on the list! (You aren't the one who gets the
receipt, but you are the one who signs for having surrendered them, certifying that you threw them
onto the pile!) And when at dusk the last truck leaves the prison yard with the prisoners, they see the
convoy guards rushing to grab the best leather suitcases from the pile and select the best cigarette
cases from the barrel. And after them, the jailers scurry for their booty, too, and last of all the transit
prison trusties.

That is what it cost to spend one day to get to the cattle car. And now the prisoners have clambered
with relief up onto the splintered planks of the bunks. But what kind of relief is this, what kind of
heated cattle car is this? Once again they are squeezed in a nutcracker between cold and starvation,
between the thieves and the convoy.



If there are thieves in a cattle car (and they are, of course, not kept separate in the red trains either)
they take the best places, as is traditional — on the upper bunks by the window. That's in summer. So
we can guess where their places are in winter. Next to the stove, of course, in a tight ring around the
stove. As the former thief Minayev recalls: in 1949, during a severe cold wave, they were issued
only three pails of coal for their car for the entire journey from Voronezh to Kotlas, lasting several
days.

[In a letter to me in the Literatumaya Gazeta, November 29, 1963.]

And in this crisis, the thieves not only occupied the places around the stove, and not only took all the
suckers' warm things away from them and put them on, but didn't even hesitate to take their
footcloths out of their shoes and wind them around their own feet. You today, me tomorrow. It was
somewhat worse with food — the thieves took charge of the whole ration for the car and then kept
the best for themselves along with whatever else they needed. Loshchilin recalls a three-day prisoner
transport from Moscow to Perebory in 1937. They didn't cook anything hot on the train for such a
short journey and handed out only dry ra- tions. The thieves took the best for themselves but gave
the others permission to divide up the bread and the herring; and that meant they weren't hungry.
When the ration was hot and the thieves were in charge of distributing it, they divided up the gruel
among themselves. (A three- week transport from Kishinev to Pechora in 1945.) With all this, the
thieves didn't scruple to engage also in plain and simple robbery en route: they noticed an Estonian's
gold teeth and they pushed him down and knocked out the teeth with a poker.

The zeks considered the hot food the real advantage of the red trains: at remote stations (again where
people couldn't see them) the trains stopped and gruel and porridge were doled out to the cars. But
they even managed to give out the hot food in such a way that things went wrong. They might (as on
that same Kishinev train) pour out the gruel in the same pails in which they issued coal — there being
nothing to wash them out with. Because drinking water was also rationed on the train and was in
even shorter supply than gruel. And so you gulped down the gruel, your teeth gritting on pieces of
coal. Or they brought the gruel and the hot cereal to the car and didn't issue enough bowls — twenty-
five instead of forty — and promptly ordered: "Come on, come on, faster, faster. We have other cars
to feed too, not just you." How then could you eat, how could you divide it up? You couldn't dish it
out equitably on the basis of bowls, and that meant you had to estimate each portion so as not to give
out too much. And those to be served first would shout: "Stir it! Stir it!" And the last kept silent:
there would be more on the bottom. The first were eating and the last waiting. They would have
Uked the others to eat faster, because they were hungry, and meanwhile the gruel would be getting
cold in the barrel and they were also being hurried from outside: "Well, have you finished? Come on
now, get a move on!" And then they served the second contingent — not more and not less and not
thicker and not thinner than the first. And then came estimating the leftovers correctly and pour- ing
them out two portions to a bowl. And all this time forty people don't so much eat as watch the
sharing out and suffer.

They don't heat the car, they don't protect the other prisoners from the thieves, they don't give you
enough to drink, and they don't give you enough to eat — but on the other hand they don't let you
sleep either. During the day the convoy can see the whole train very clearly and the tracks behind
them, and can be sure that no one has jumped out the side or slipped down on the rails. But at night
vigilance possesses them. With long-handled wooden mallets (the standard Gulag equipment) they
knock resoundingly on every board of the car at every stop: maybe someone has sawed through it.
And at certain stops the door of the car is thrown open. The light of the lantern or the beam of the
search- light: "Checkup!" And this means: Get on your feet and be ready to go where they tell you —
everyone run to the left or to the right. The convoy guards jump inside with their mallets (others
have ranged themselves in a semicircle outside with auto- matic pistols), and they point: to the left!
That means that those on the left are in place and those on the right must get over there on the jump
like fleas hopping over each other and landing where they can. And whoever isn't nimble, whoever
gets caught day- dreaming, gets whacked on the ribs and back with the mallets to give him more



energy. And by this time the convoy jackboots are already trampling your pauper's pallet and all
your lousy duds are being thrown in every direction and everywhere there are lights and hammering:
Have you sawed through any place? No. Then the convoy guards stand in the middle and begin to
shift you from left to right, counting: "First . . . second . . . third." It would be quite enough to count
simply with a wave of the finger, but if that were done, it wouldn't be terrifying, and so it is more
vivid, less subject to error, more energetic and faster, to beat out that count with the same mallet on
your ribs, shoulders, heads, wherever it happens to land. They have counted up to forty. So now they
will go about their tossing, lighting up, and hammering at the other end of the car. It's all over finally
and the car is locked up. You can go back to sleep till the next stop. (And one can't really say that the
anxiety of the convoy guard is entirely un- founded — because those who know how can escape from
the red cattle cars. For instance, they knock on a board to test it and find it has been partially sawed
through. Or suddenly in the morning, when the gruel is being distributed, they see that there are
several shaved faces among the unshaven ones. And they surround the car with their automatic
pistols: "Hand over your knives!" And this is really just petty bravado on the part of the thieves and
their allies: they got tired of being unshaven, and now they are going to have to turn in their razor.)

The red train differs from other long-distance trains in that those who have embarked on it do not
know whether or not they will disembark. When they unloaded a trainload from the Lenin- grad
prisons (1942) in Solikamsk, the entire embankment was covered with corpses, and only a few got
there alive. In the winters of 1944-1945 and 1945-1946 in the village of Zhelez- nodorozhny
(Knyazh-Pogost), as in all the main rail junctions in the North, the prisoner trains from liberated
territories (the Baltic states, Poland, Germany) arrived with one or two car- loads of corpses tacked
on behind. That meant that en route they had carefully taken the corpses out of the cars that
contained the living passengers and put them in the dead cars. But not always. There were many
occasions when they found out who was still alive and who was dead only when they opened up the
car after arriving at the Sukhobezvodnaya (Unzhlag) Station. Those who didn't come out were dead.

It was terrifying and deadly to travel this way in winter be- cause the convoy, with all its bother
about security, wasn't able to haul coal for twenty-five stoves. But it wasn't so cushy to travel this
way in hot weather either. Two of the four tiny windows were tightly sealed and the car roof would
overheat and the convoy wasn't about to exert itself in hauling water for a thousand prison- ers —
after all, they couldn't even manage to give just one Stolypin car enough to drink. The prisoners
considered April and Sep- tember the best months for transports. But even the best of sea- sons was
too short if the train was en route for three months. (Leningrad to Vladivostok in 1935.) And if such
a long trip is in prospect, then arrangements have been made for both political indoctrination of the
convoy soldiers and spiritual care of the imprisoned souls: in a separate railroad car attached to such
a train travels a "godfather" — a Security officer. He has made his preparations for the prisoner-
transport train back in prison, and prisoners are assigned to cars not simply at random but accord- ing
to lists he has validated. He is the one who appoints the monitor in each car and who has instructed
and assigned a stool pigeon to each. At long stops he finds some pretext for sum- moning both from
the car and asks what the people are talking about in there. And any such Security chief would be
ashamed to finish the journey without signed and sealed results. And so right there en route he puts
someone under interrogation, and lo and behold! by the time they reach their destination, the
prisoner has been handed a new prison term.

No, damn that red cattle car train too, even though it did carry the prisoners straight to their
destination without changing trains. Anyone who has ever been in one will never forget it. Just as
well get to camp sooner! Just as well arrive sooner.

A human being is all hope and impatience. As if the Security officer in camp will be any more
humane or the stoolies any less unscrupulous. It's just the other way around. As if they won't force us
to the ground with those same threats and those same police dogs when we arrive: "Sit down!" As if
there will be less snow on the ground in camp than what has sifted through into the cattle cars. As if
it means that we've already gotten to where we're going when they begin to unload us and won't be



carried farther in open flatcars on a narrow-gauge track. (And how can they carry us in open flatcars?
How can we be kept under guard? That's a problem for the convoy. And here is how they do it: They
order us to lie down all huddled together and they cover us with one big tarpaulin, like the sailors in
the motion picture Potemkin before they're to be executed. And say thank you for the tarpaulin too.
In the North, in October, Olenyev and his comrades had the luck to have to sit in open flatcars all
day long. They had already embarked, but no locomotive had come. First it rained. Then it froze.
And the zeks' rags froze on them.) The tiny train will jerk and toss as it moves, and the sides of the
flatcar will begin to crack and break, and the bouncing will hurl someone off the car and under the
wheels. And here is a riddle: If one is traveling sixty miles from Dudinka through Arctic frost in
open flatcars on the narrow-gauge track, then where are the thieves going to be? Answer: In the
middle of each flatcar, so the livestock around them will keep them warm and keep them from
falling under the train themselves. Right answer! Question: What will the zeks see at the end of this
narrow-gauge track (1939)? Will there be any buildings there? No, not a one. Any dugouts? Yes, but
already occupied, not for them. And does that mean that the first thing they do will be to dig
themselves dugouts? No, because how can they dig in the Arctic winter? Instead, they will be sent
out to mine metal. And where will they live? What — live? Oh, yes, Uve . . . They will live in tents.

But will there always be a narrow-gauge track? No, of course not. The train arrived: Yertsovo
Station, February, 1938. The railroad cars were opened up at night. Bonfires were lit along- side the
train and disembarkation took place by their light; then a count-off, forming up, and a count-off
again. The temperature was 32 degrees below zero Centigrade. The prisoners' transport train had
come from the Donbas, and all the prisoners had been arrested back in the summer and were wearing
low shoes, ox- fords, even sandals. They tried to warm themselves at the fires, but the guards chased
them away: that's not what the fires were there for; they were there to give Ught. Fingers grew numb
almost instantly. The snow filled the thin shoes and didn't even melt. There was no mercy and the
order was given: "Fall in! Form up! One step to the right or left and we'll fire without warning.
Forward march!" The dogs on their chains howled at their favor- ite command, at the excitement of
the moment. The convoy guards marched ahead in their sheepskin coats — and the doomed prisoners
in their summer clothes marched through deep snow on a totally untraveled road somewhere into the
dark taiga, nary a light ahead. The northern lights gleamed — for them it was their first and probably
their last view of them. The fir trees crackled in the frost. The ill-shod prisoners paced and trod down
the snow, their feet and legs growing numb from the cold.

Or, as another example, here is a January, 1945, arrival at Pechora. ("Our armies have captured
Warsaw! Our armies have cut off East Prussia!") An empty snowy field. The prisoners were tossed
out of the cars, made to sit down in the snow by sixes, painstakingly counted off, miscounted, and
counted again. They were ordered to stand up and then were harried through a snowy virgin waste
for four miles. This prisoner transport was also from the south — from Moldavia. And everyone was
wearing leather shoes. The police dogs were right on their heels, and the dogs pushed the zeks in the
last row with their paws on their backs, breathing on the backs of their heads. (Two priests were in
that row — old gray -haired Father Fyodor Florya and young Father Viktor Shipovalnikov, who was
helping to hold him up.) What a use for police dogs? No, what self-restraint it showed on the dogs'
part! After all, they wanted to bite so badly!

Finally they arrived. There was a camp reception bath; they had to undress in one cabin, run across
the yard naked, and wash in another. But all this was bearable now: the worst was over. They had
arrived. Twilight fell. And all of a sudden it was learned there was no room for them; the camp
wasn't ready to receive the prisoner transport. And after the bath, the prisoners were again formed
up, counted, surrounded by dogs, and were marched back to their prisoner-transport train all those
four miles, but this time in the dark. And the car doors had been left open all those hours, and had
lost even their earlier, pitiful measure of warmth, and then all the coal had been burned up by the end
of the journey and there was nowhere to get any more now. And in these circumstances, they froze
all night and in the morning were given dried carp (and anyone who wanted to drink could chew
snow), and then marched back along the same road again.



And this, after all, was an episode with a happy ending. In this case, the camp at least existed. If it
couldn't accept them today, it would tomorrow. But it was not at all unusual for the red trains to
arrive nowhere, and the end of the journey often marked the opening day of a new camp. They might
simply stop somewhere in the taiga under the northern lights and nail to a fir tree a sign reading:
"FIRST OLP."

[OLP = Otdetny Lagerny Punkt - Separate Camp Site.]

And there they would chew on dried fish for a week and try to mix their flour with snow.

But if a camp had been set up there even two weeks earlier, that already spelled comfort; hot food
would have been cooked; and even if there were no bowls, the first and second courses would
nonetheless be mixed together in washbasins for six prison- ers to eat from at the same time; and this
group of six would form a circle (there were no tables or chairs yet), and two of them would hold
onto the handles of the washbasin with their left hands and would eat with their right hands, taking
turns. Am I repeating myself? No, this was Perebory in 1937, as reported by Loshchilin. It is not I
who am repeating myself, but Gulag.

Next they would assign the newcomers brigade leaders from among the camp veterans, who would
quickly teach them to live, to make do, to submit to discipline, and to cheat. And from their very first
morning, they would march off to work because the chimes of the clock of the great Epoch were
striking and could not wait. The Soviet Union is not, after all, some Tsarist hard- labor Akatui for
you, where prisoners got three days' rest after they arrived.

Gradually the economy of the Archipelago prospered. New rail- road branch lines were built. And
soon they were transporting prisoners by train to many places that had been reached only by water
not long before. But there are natives of the Archipelago still alive who can tell you how they went
down the Izhma River in genuine ancient Russian river galleys, one hundred to a boat, and the
prisoners themselves did the rowing. They can tell you how they traveled in fishing smacks down the
northern rivers of Ukhta, Usa, and Pechora to their native camp. Zeks were shipped to Vorkuta in
barges: on large barges to Adzvavom, where there was a transshipping point for Vorkutlag, and from
there only a stone's throw, let's say, to Ust-Usa, on a flat-bottomed barge for ten days. The whole
barge was alive with lice, and the convoy allowed the prisoners to go up on deck one by one and
brush the parasites off into the water. The river transports did not proceed directly to their destination
either, but were sometimes interrupted to transfer for transshipment, or for portage, or for stretches
covered on foot.

And they had their own transit prisons in this area — built out of poles or tents — Ust-Usa,
Pomozdino, Shchelya-Yur, where they had their own special system of regulations. They had their
own convoy rules, and of course, their own special commands, and their own special convoy tricks,
and their own special methods of tormenting the zeks. But it's already clear that it is not our task to
describe those particular exotica, so we won't even begin.

The Northern Dvina, the Ob, and the Yenisei know when they began to haul prisoners in barges —
during the liquidation of the "kulaks." These rivers flowed straight north, and their barges were
potbellied and capacious — and it was the only way they could cope with the task of carting all this
gray mass from living Russia to the dead North. People were thrown into the trough- like holds and
lay there in piles or crawled around like crabs in a basket. And high up on the deck, as though atop a
cliff, stood guards. Sometimes they transported this mass out in the open without any cover, and
sometimes they covered it with a big tarpaulin — in order not to look at it, or to guard it better, but
certainly not to keep off the rain. The journey in such a barge was no longer prisoner transport, but
simply death on the installment plan. Anyway, they gave them hardly anything to eat. Then they
tossed them out in the tundra — and there they didn't give them anything at all to eat. They just left
them there to die, alone with nature.



Prisoner transport by barge on the Northern Dvina (and on the Vychegda) had not died out even by
1940. That was how A. Y. Olenyev was transported. Prisoners in the hold stood tightly jammed
against each other, and not just for a day either. They urinated in glass jars which were passed from
hand to hand and emptied through the porthole. And anything more substantial went right in their
pants.

Barge transport on the Yenisei came to be a regular and permanent feature for whole decades. In
Krasnoyarsk in the thirties, open-sided sheds were built on the bank, and in the cold Siberian winters
the prisoners would shiver there for a day or two while they waited for transportation.

[And V. I. Lenin in 1897 boarded the St. Nicholas in the passenger port like a free person.]

The Yenisei prisoner- transport barges were permanently equipped with dark holds three decks deep.
The only light was what filtered in through the companionway for the ship's ladder. The convoy
lived in a little cabin on deck. Sentries kept watch over the exits from the hold and over the river to
make sure that no one escaped by swimming. They didn't go down into the hold, no matter what
groans and howls for help might come from there. And the prisoners were never taken up on deck
for fresh air. In the prisoner transports of 1937 and 1938, and 1944 and 1945 (and we can guess it
must have been the same in the interval), no medical assistance what- ever was provided in the hold.
The prisoners lay there lined up in two rows, one with their heads toward the side of the barge and
the heads of the other row at their feet. The only way to get to the latrine barrels was to walk over
them. The latrine barrels were not always emptied in time (imagine lugging that barrel full of sewage
up the steep ship's ladder to the deck). They overflowed, and the contents spilled along the deck and
seeped down on those below. And people lay there. They were fed gruel from casks hauled along the
deck. The servers were prison- ers too, and there, in the eternal darkness (today, perhaps, there is
electricity), by the light of a portable "Bat" kerosene lamp, they ladled out the food. Such a prisoner
transport to Dudinka sometimes took a month. (Nowadays, of course, they can do it in a week.) It
sometimes happened that the trip dragged out much longer because of sand bars and other hazards of
river travel, and they wouldn't have enough food with them, in which case they just stopped giving
out the food for several days at a time. (And later on, of course, they never made up for the days they
missed.)

At this point the alert reader can without the author's help add that the thieves were on the upper
level inside the hold and closer to the ship's ladder — in other words, to light and air. They had what
access they required to the distribution of the bread ration, and if the trip in question was a hard one,
they didn't hesitate to whip away the holy crutch (in other words, they took the gray cattle's rations
from them). The thieves whiled away the long journey playing cards, and they made their own
decks.

[V. Shalamov tells about this in detail in his Ocherki prestupnogo mira {Sketches of the Criminal
World).^

They got the stakes for their card games hy frisking the suckers, search- ing everyone lying in a
particular section of the barge. For a certain length of time they won and lost and rewon and relost
their loot, and then it floated up to the convoy. Yes, the reader has now guessed everything: the
thieves had the convoy on the hook; the convoy either kept the stolen things for themselves or sold
them at the wharves and brought the thieves something to eat in exchange.

And what about resistance? It happened — but only rarely. One case has been preserved. In 1950 on
such a barge as I have described, except that it was larger — a seagoing barge en route from
Vladivostok to Sakhalin — seven unarmed 58's resisted the thieves (in this case bitches), who
numbered about eighty in all (some with knives, as usual). These bitches had searched the whole
transport back at Vladivostok transit point three-ten, and they had searched it very thoroughly, in no
way less efficiently than the jailers; they knew all the hiding places, but no search can ever turn up



everything. Aware of this, when they were al- ready in the hold they treacherously announced:
"Whoever has money can buy makhorka." And Misha Grachev got out three rubles he had hidden in
his quilted jacket. And the bitch Volodka Tatarin shouted at him: "You crowbait, why don't you pay
your taxes?" And he rushed in to take it away. But Master Sergeant Pavel (whose last name has not
been recorded) pushed him away. Volodka Tatarin aimed a slingshot — a "V" fork — at Pavel's eyes,
and Pavel knocked him off his feet. Immediately twenty to thirty bitches moved in on him. And
around Grachev and Pavel gathered Volodya Shpakov, a former army captain, Seryezha Potapov,
Volodya Reunov, a former army sergeant, Volodya Tretyukin, another former sergeant, and Vasa
Krav- tsov. And what happened? The whole thing ended after only a few blows had been exchanged.
This may have been a matter of the age-old and very real cowardice of the thieves (always concealed
behind feigned toughness and devil-may-care insolence); or else the proximity of the guard held
them back (this being right beneath the hatchway). Or it may have been that on this trip they were
saving themselves for a more important social task — to seize control of the Aleksandrovsk Transit
Prison (the one Chekhov described) and a Sakhalin construction project (seizing control of it, of
course, not in order to construct) before the honest thieves could; at any rate they pulled back,
restricting themselves to the threat: "On dry land we'll make garbage out of you!" (The battle never
took place, and no one made "garbage" out of the boys. And at the Aleksandrovsk transit point the
bitches met with misfortune: it was already firmly held by the honest thieves.)

In steamships to the Kolyma everything was the same as on the barges except that everything was on
a larger scale. Strange as it seems, some of the prisoners sent to the Kolyma in several over- age old
tubs on the famous expedition led by the ice-breaker Krasin in the spring of 1938 are still alive
today. On the steamers Dzhurma, Kulu, Nevostroi, Dneprostroi, for which the Krasin was breaking
the way through the spring ice, there were also three decks in the cold, dirty holds, and on these
decks, in addi- tion, there were two-story bunks made out of poles. It was not completely dark: there
were some kerosene lanterns and lamps. The prisoners were allowed up on deck in batches for fresh
air and walks. Three to four thousand prisoners were in each steamer. The voyage took more than a
week, and before it was over all the bread brought aboard in Vladivostok got moldy and the ration
was reduced from twenty-one to fourteen ounces a day. They also gave out fish, and as for drinking
water . . . Well, there's no reason to gloat here, because there were temporary difficulties with the
water. Here, in contrast to the river transports, there were heavy seas, storms, seasickness. The
exhausted, en- feebled people vomited, and didn't have the strength to get up out of their vomit, and
all the floors were covered with the nauseating mess.

There was one political incident on the voyage. The steamers had to pass through La Perouse Strait,
very close to the Japanese islands. And at that point the machine guns disappeared from the
watchtowers and the convoy guards changed to civilian clothes, the hatches were battened down, and
access to the decks was forbidden. According to the ships' papers, foresightedly prepared back in
Vladivostok, they were transporting, God save us, not prisoners but volunteers for work in the
Kolyma. A multitude of Japanese small craft and boats hovered about the ships without suspecting.
(And on another occasion, in 1938, there was an incident involving the Dzhurma: The thieves aboard
got out of the hold and into the storage room, plundered it, and set it afire. The ship was very close to
Japan when this occurred. Smoke was pouring from it, and the Japanese offered help, but the cap-
tain refused to accept it and even refused to open the hatches. When Japan had been left behind, the
corpses of those suffocated by smoke were thrown overboard, and the half -burned, half- spoiled food
aboard was sent on to camp as rations for the prisoners.)

[Decades have passed since then, but how many times Soviet citizens have met with misfortune on
the world's oceans — and in circumstances where it seems that zeks were not being transported — yet
because of that same secretiveness disguised as national pride they have refused help! Let the sharks
devour us, so long as we don't have to accept your helping hand! Secretiveness — that is our cancer.]

Short of Magadan the ship caravan got caught in the ice and not even the Krasin could help (it was
too early for navigation, but they had been in a hurry to deliver laborers). On May 2 they



disembarked the prisoners on the ice, some distance from the shore. The newly arrived prisoners got
a look at the cheerless panorama of the Magadan of that time: dead hillocks, neither trees, nor
bushes, nor birds, just a few wooden houses and the two-story building of "Dalstroi." Nonetheless,
continuing to play out the farce of correction, in other words, pretending they had brought not
simply bones with which to pave the gold-bearing Kolyma but temporarily isolated Soviet citizens
who would yet return to creative life, they were greeted by the Dalstroi orchestra. The orchestra
played marches and waltzes, and the tormented, half-dead people strung along the ice in a gray line,
dragging their Moscow belongings with them (and this enormous prisoner trans- port consisted
almost entirely of politicals who had hardly en- countered a single thief yet) and carrying on their
shoulders other half-dead people — arthritis sufferers or prisoners without legs. (And the legless, too,
got prison terms.)

But here I note that I am again beginning to repeat myself. And this will be boring to write, and
boring to read, because the reader already knows everything that is going to happen ahead of time:
The prisoners would be trucked hundreds of miles, and driven dozens of miles more on foot. And on
arriving they would occupy new camp sites and immediately be sent out to work. And they would
eat fish and flour, chased down with snow. And sleep in tents.

Yes, it was like that. But first the authorities would put them up in Magadan, also in Arctic tents, and
would commission them there too — in other words, examine them naked to determine their fitness
for labor from the condition of their buttocks (and all of them would turn out to be fit). In addition,
of course, they would be taken to a bath and in the bath vestibule they would be ordered to leave
their leather coats, their Romanov sheepskin coats, their woolen sweaters, their suits of fine wool,
their felt cloaks, their leather boots, their felt boots (for, after all, these were no illiterate peasants this
time, but the Party elite — editors of newspapers, directors of trusts and factories, responsible offi-
cials in the provincial Party committees, professors of political economy, and, by the beginning of
the thirties, all of them under- stood what good merchandise was). "And who is going to guard
them?" the newcomers asked skeptically. "Oh, come on now, who needs your things?" The bath
personnel acted offended. "Go on in and don't worry." And they did go in. And the exit was through
a different door, and after passing through it, they received black cotton breeches, field shirts, camp
quilted jackets without pockets, and pigskin shoes. (Oh, this was no small thing! This was farewell to
your former life — to your titles, your posi- tions, and your arrogance!) "Where are our things?" they
cried. "Your things you left at home!" some chief or other bellowed at them. "In camp nothing
belongs to you. Here in camp we have communism! Forward march, leader!"

And if it was "communism," then what was there for them to object to? That is what they had
dedicated their lives to.

And there are also prisoner transports in carts and simply on foot. Do you remember in Tolstoi's
Resurrection how on a sunny day they drove them on foot from the prison to the railroad sta- tion?
Well, in Minusinsk in 194-, after the prisoners hadn't been taken into the fresh air for a whole year,
they had forgotten how to walk, to breathe, to look at the light. And then they took them out, put
them in formation, and drove them the fifteen miles to Abakan on foot. About a dozen of them died
along the way. And no one is ever going to write a great novel about it, not even one chapter: if you
live in a graveyard, you can't weep for everyone.

A prisoner transport on foot — that was the grandfather of prisoner transport by rail, of the Stolypin
car, and of the red cattle cars too. In our time it is used less and less, and only where mechanical
transportation is still impossible. Thus in one sector of Lake Ladoga, the prisoners were sent on foot
from besieged Leningrad to the red cars, nicknamed "red cows." They led the women together with
the German POW's, and used bayonets to keep our men away from them so they couldn't take their
bread. Those who fell by the wayside were immediately tossed up into a truck alive or dead, after
their shoes were removed. And in the thirties, each day they sent off on foot from the Kotlas Transit
Prison to Ust-Vym (about 185 miles) and sometimes to Chibyu (more than 300 miles) a transport of



a hundred prisoners. Once in 1938 tliey sent off a women's prisoner transport tlie same way. These
transports covered 15 miles a day. The convoy marched along with one or two dogs, and those who
fell behind were urged on with gunstocks. True, the prisoners' possessions as well as the cooking pot
and the food brought up the rear in carts, and this transport thus recalled the classic prisoner trans-
ports of the past century. There were also prisoner-transport huts — the ruined houses of liquidated
kulaks, with windows broken and doors ripped off. The accounting office of the Kotlas Transit
Prison had issued provisions to the transport based on a theoreti- cal estimate of the time the journey
would take, provided nothing went wrong on the way, without allowing for even one extra day. (The
basic principle of all our accounting.) Whenever delays occurred en route, they had to stretch out the
provisions, and fed the prisoners a mash of rye flour without salt and sometimes nothing at all. In
this respect they departed from the classic model.

In 1940 Olenyev's prisoner transport, after disembarking from the barge, was herded on foot through
the taiga (from Knyazh- Pogost to Chibyu) without anything to eat at all. They drank swamp water
and very quickly got dysentery. Some fell by the wayside out of weakness, and the dogs tore the
clothes off those who had fallen. In Izhma they caught fish by using their trousers as nets and ate
them alive. (And in a certain meadow they were told: Right here is where you are going to build a
railroad from Kotlas to Vorkuta.)

And in other areas of our European North, prisoner transports on foot were standard until the time
when, on those same routes and roadbeds built by those earlier zeks, the jolly red cattle cars rolled
along carrying later prisoners.

A particular technique for prisoner transports on foot was worked out where such transports were

frequent and abundant. When a transport is being taken through the taiga from Knyazh- Pogost to
Veslyana, and suddenly some prisoner falls by the wayside and can go no farther, what is to be done
with him? Just be reasonable and think about it: what? You aren't going to stop the whole transport.
And you aren't going to leave one soldier behind for everyone who falls. There are many prisoners
and only a few soldiers. And what does that mean? The soldier stays behind for a little while with the
fallen prisoner and then hurries on to catch up with the rest — alone.

Regular transports on foot from Karabas to Spassk were retained for a long time. It was only twenty
to twenty-five miles, but it had to be covered in one day, with one thousand prisoners in each
transport, many of them very weak. It was expected in cases like these that many would simply
either drop in their tracks or else fall behind through the indifference and apathy of dying men — you
may shoot at them but they still can't go on. They are not afraid of death, but what about clubs, the
indefatigable beating of the clubs wherever they hit? They are afraid of clubs, and they will keep
going. This is a tested method — that's how it works. And so in these cases the transport column is
surrounded not only by the ordinary chain of machine gunners at a distance of fifty yards, but also by
an inner chain of soldiers armed only with clubs. Those who have fallen behind get beaten. (As, in
fact. Comrade Stalin prophesied.) They are beaten again and again. And even when they have no
strength at all with which to go farther, they keep going. And many do miraculously get to the
destination. They don't know that this is a testing by clubs, and that those who lie down and stay
lying down and don't go on despite the clubs are picked up by carts following behind. That's
organizational experience for you! (And one can ask: Why, then, didn't they take them all on carts in
the first place? But where could enough carts be found? And horses? After all, we have tractors.
What about the price of oats nowadays?) Such transports as these were still common in 1948-1950.

And in the twenties, transport on foot was one of the basic methods. I was a small boy, but I
remember very well how they drove them down the streets of Rostov-on-the-Don without any
qualms. And the famous order: "... will open fire without warn- ing!" had a different ring at that
time, again because of a differ- ence in technology: after all, the convoy often had only sabers. They
used to deliver orders like this: "One step out of line and the convoy guard will shoot and slash!"
That had a very powerful sound: "shoot and slash!" You could imagine them cutting off your head



from behind.



Yes, and even in February, 1936, they drove on foot through Nizhni Novgorod a transport of long-
bearded old men from the other side of the Volga, in their homespun coats and in real lapty — bast
sandals — wrapped around with onuchi — Russian peasant footcloths — "Old Russia disappearing."
And all of a sudden, right across their path, came three automobiles, in one of which rode the
Chairman of the Central Executive Committee, President of the Soviet Union, this is to say, Kalinin.
The prisoner transport halted. Kalinin went on through. He wasn't interested.

Shut your eyes, reader. Do you hear the thundering of wheels? Those are the Stolypin cars rolling on
and on. Those are the red cows rolling. Every minute of the day. And every day of the year. And you
can hear the water gurgling — those are prisoners' barges moving on and on. And the motors of the
Black Marias roar. They are arresting someone all the time, cramming him in some- where, moving
him about. And what is that hum you hear? The overcrowded cells of the transit prisons. And that
cry? The com- plaints of those who have been plundered, raped, beaten to within an inch of their
hves.

We have reviewed and considered all the methods of deliver- ing prisoners, and we have found that
they are all ... worse. We have examined the transit prisons, but we have not found any that were
good. And even the last human hope that there is some- thing better ahead, that it will be better in
camp, is a false hope.

In camp it will be ... worse.

Chapter 4

From Island to Island

And zeks are also moved from island to island of the Arc hi- pelago simply in solitary skiffs. This is
called special convoy. It is the most unconstrained mode of transport. It can hardly be distinguished
from free travel. Only a few prisoners are delivered in this way. I, in my own career as a prisoner,
made three such journeys.

The special convoy is assigned on orders from high officials. It should not be confused with the
special requisition, which is also signed by someone high up. A special-requisition prisoner usually
travels on the general prisoner transports, though he, too, meets up with some amazing interludes on
his trip (which are all the more extraordinary in consequence). For example, Ans Bern- shtein was
traveling on a special requisition from the North to the lower Volga, to join an agricultural mission.
He was exposed to all the overcrowded conditions and humiliations I have described, snarled at by
dogs, surrounded by bayonets, threatened with "One step out of line ..." And then suddenly he was
unloaded at the small station at Zenzevatka and met by one single, calm, un- armed jailer. The jailer
yawned: "All right, you'll spend the night at my house, and you can go out on the town as you like
till morning. Tomorrow I'll take you to the camp." And Ans did go out. Can you understand what
going out on the town means to a person whose term is ten years, who has already said good-bye to
Ufe countless times, who was in a Stolypin car that very morning and will be in camp the next day?
And he im- mediately went out to watch the chickens scratching around in the station master's
garden and the peasant women getting ready to leave the station with their unsold butter and melons.
He moved three, four, five steps to the side and no one shouted "Halt!" at him. With unbelieving
fingers he touched the leaves of the acacias and almost wept.

And the special convoy is precisely that sort of miracle from beginning to end. You won't see the
common prisoner transports this time. You don't have to keep your hands behind your back. You
don't have to undress down to your skin, nor sit on the earth on your rear end, and there won't be any
search at all. Your convoy guards approach you in a friendly way and even address you politely.



They warn you, as a general precaution, that in case of any attempt to escape — We do, as usual,
shoot. Our pistols are loaded and we have them in our pockets. However, let's go simply. Act natural.
Don't let everyone see that you're a prisoner. (And I urge you to note how here, too, as always, the
interests of the individual and the interests of the state coincide com- pletely.)

My camp life was totally transformed the day I went out to line up forlornly in the carpenters'
brigade, my fingers cramped (they had gotten stiff holding onto tools and wouldn't straighten out),
and the work-assignment supervisor took me aside and with unexpected respect said to me: "Do you
know that on orders of the Minister of Internal Affairs . . . ?"

I was stupefied. The line-up dispersed and the trusties in the camp compound surrounded me. Some
of them said: "They are going to hang a new stretch on you." And others said: "To be released." But
everyone agreed on one thing — that there was no escaping Minister of Internal Affairs Kruglov. And
I, too, swayed between a new term and being released. I had quite for- gotten that half a year before,
some character had come to our camp and distributed Gulag registration cards. (After the war they
had begun this registration in all the nearby camps, but it seems unlikely that it was ever completed.)
The most important question on it was: "Trade or Profession." And the zeks would fill in the most
precious Gulag trades to enhance their own value: "barber," "tailor," "storekeeper," "baker." As for
me, I had frowned and filled in "nuclear physicist." I had never been a nu- clear physicist in my life,
and what I knew of the field I had heard in the university before the war — just a little bit, the names
of the atomic particles and their parameters. And I had decided to write down "nuclear physicist."
This was in 1946. The atom bomb was desperately needed. But I didn't assign any importance to that
Gulag registration card and, in fact, forgot about it.

There was a vague, unverified legend, unconfirmed by any- body, that you might nevertheless hear
in camp: that some- where in this Archipelago were tiny paradise islands. No one had seen them. No
one had been there. Whoever had, kept silent about them and never let on. On those islands, they
said, flowed rivers of milk and honey, and eggs and sour cream were the least of what they fed you;
things were neat and clean, they said, and it was always warm, and the only work was mental
work — and all of it super- supersecret.

And so it was that I got to those paradise islands myself (in convict lingo they are called
"sharashkas") and spent half my sentence on them. It's to them I owe my survival, for I would never
have lived out my whole term in the camps. And it's to them I owe the fact that I am writing this
investigation, even though I have not allowed them any place in this book. (I have already written a
novel about them.) And it was from one to an- other of those islands, from the first to the second,
and from the second to the third, that I was transported on a special-convoy basis: two jailers and I.

If the souls of those who have died sometimes hover among us, see us, easily read in us our trivial
concerns, and we fail to see them or guess at their incorporeal presence, then that is what a special-
convoy trip is Uke.

You are submerged in the mass of freedom, and you push and shove with the others in the station
waiting room. You absent- mindedly examine announcements posted there, even though they can
hardly have any relevance for you. You sit on the ancient passenger benches, and you hear strange
and insignificant con- versations: about some husband who beats up his wife or has left her; and
some mother-in-law who, for some reason, does not get along with her daughter-in-law; how
neighbors in communal apartments make personal use of the electric outlets in the corri- dor and
don't wipe their feet; and how someone is in someone else's way at the office; and how someone has
been offered a good job but can't make up his mind to move — how can he move bag and baggage, is
that so easy? You listen to all this, and the goose pimples of rejection run up and down your spine: to
you the true measure of things in the Universe is so clear! The measure of all weaknesses and all
passions! And these sinners aren't fated to perceive it. The only one there who is alive, truly alive, is
incorporeal you, and all these others are simply mistaken in thinking themselves alive.



And an unbridgeable chasm divides you! You cannot cry out to them, nor weep over them, nor shake
them by the shoulder: after all, you are a disembodied spirit, you are a ghost, and they are material
bodies.

And how can you bring it home to them? By an inspiration? By a vision? A dream? Brothers!
People! Why has life been given you? In the deep, deaf stillness of midnight, the doors of the death
cells are being swung open — and great-souled people are being dragged out to be shot. On all the
railroads of the country this very minute, right now, people who have just been fed salt herring are
licking their dry lips with bitter tongues. They dream of the happiness of stretching out one's legs
and of the relief one feels after going to the toilet. In Orotukan the earth thaws only in summer and
only to the depth of three feet — and only then can they bury the bones of those who died during the
winter. And you have the right to arrange your own life under the blue sky and the hot sun, to get a
drink of water, to stretch, to travel wherever you like without a convoy. So what's this about unwiped
feet? And what's this about a mother-in-law? What about the main thing in life, all its riddles? If you
want, I'll spell it out for you right now. Do not pursue what is illusory — property and posi- tion: all
that is gained at the expense of your nerves decade after decade, and is confiscated in one fell night.
Live with a steady superiority over life — don't be afraid of misfortune, and do not yearn after
happiness; it is, after all, all the same: the bitter doesn't last forever, and the sweet never fills the cup
to over- flowing. It is enough if you don't freeze in the cold and if thirst and hunger don't claw at
your insides. If your back isn't broken, if your feet can walk, if both arms can bend, if both eyes see,
and if both ears hear, then whom should you envy? And why? Our envy of others devours us most of
all. Rub your eyes and purify your heart — and prize above all else in the world those who love you
and who wish you well. Do not hurt them or scold them, and never part from any of them in anger;
after all, you simply do not know: it might be your last act before your arrest, and that will be how
you are imprinted in their memory!

But the convoy guards stroke the black handles of the pistols in their pockets. And we sit there, three
in a row, sober fellows, quiet friends.

I wipe my brow. I shut my eyes, and then I open them. And once again I see this dream: a crowd of
people unaccompanied by guards. I remember clearly that I spent last night in a cell and will be in a
cell again tomorrow. But here comes some kind of conductor to punch my ticket: "Your ticket!" "My
friend there has it!"

The cars are full. (Well, "full" in free people's terms — no one is lying under the benches, and no one
is sitting on the floor in the aisles.) I was told to behave naturally, and I have been behaving very
naturally indeed: I noticed a seat beside a window in the next compartment, and got up and took it.
And there were no empty seats for my guards in that compartment. They sat where they were and
kept their loving eyes on me from there. In Perebory, the seat across the table from me was vacated,
but before my guard could get to it and sit down, a moon-faced fel- low in a sheepskin coat and a fur
cap, with a plain but strong wooden suitcase, sat down there. I recognized his suitcase: it was camp
work, "made in the Archipelago."

"Whew!" he puffs. There was very little light, but I could see he was red in the face and that he had
had a hassle to get on the train. And he got out a bottle: "How about a beer, comrade?" I knew that
my guards were close to a nervous breakdown in the next compartment: I was not allowed anything
alcoholic. But still ... I was supposed to conduct myself as naturally as possible. And so I said
carelessly: "All right, why not?" (Beer! It's a whole poem! For three years I hadn't had even one
swallow. And tomorrow in my cell I would brag: "I got beer!") The fellow poured it, and I drank it
down with a shiver of pleasure. It was already dark. There was no electricity in the car. This was
post- war dislocation. One tiny candle end was burning in an ancient lantern at the door, one for four
compartments: two in front and two behind. I talked amiably with the fellow even though we could
hardly see each other. No matter how far forward my guard leaned, he couldn't hear a thing because
of the clickety-clack of the wheels. In my pocket I had a postcard addressed to my home. And I was



about to explain who I was to my simple friend across the table and ask him to drop the card in a
mailbox. Judging by his suitcase he had been in stir himself. But he beat me to it: "You know, I just
barely managed to get some leave. They haven't given me any time off for two years; it's a dog's
branch of the service." "What kind?" "Don't you know? I'm an MVD man, an asmodeus, blue
shoulder boards, haven't you ever seen them?" Hell! Why hadn't I guessed right off? Perebory was
the center for Volgolag, and he had gotten his suitcase out of the zeks, they had made it for him for
free. How all this had permeated our life! Two MVD men, two asmodei, weren't enough in two com-
partments. There had to be a third. And perhaps there was also a fourth concealed somewhere? And
maybe they were in every compartment? And maybe someone else there was traveling by special
convoy like me.

My fellow kept on whining and complaining of his fate. And at that point, I decided to enter a
somewhat mystifying demurrer. "And what about the ones you're guarding, the ones who got ten
years for nothing — is it any easier for them?" He immediately subsided and remained silent until
morning: earlier, in the semi- darkness, he had noticed that I was wearing some kind of semi-
military overcoat and field shirt. And he had thought I was simply a soldier boy, but now the devil
only knew what I might be: Maybe I was a police agent? Maybe I was out to catch escapees? Why
was I in this particular car? And he had criticized the camps there in my presence.

By this time the candle end in the lantern was floating but still burning. On the third baggage shelf

some youth was talking in a pleasant voice about the war — the real war, the kind you don't read
about in books: he had been with a unit of field engineers and was describing incidents that were true
to life. And it was so pleasant to realize that unvarnished truth was, despite everything, pouring into
someone's ears.

I could have told tales too. I would even have liked to. But no, I didn't really want to any more. Like
a cow, the war had licked away four of my years. I no longer believed that it had all actually
happened and I didn't want to remember it. Two years here, two years in the Archipelago, had
dimmed in my mind all the roads of the front, all the comradeship of the front Une, had totally dark-
ened them.

One wedge knocks out another.

And after spending a few hours among free people, here is what I feel: My lips are mute; there is no
place for me among them; my hands are tied here. I want free speech! I want to go back to my native
land! I want to go home to the Archipelago!

In the morning I deliberately /orgo? my postcard on an upper shelf: after all, the conductor will get
around to cleaning up the car; she will carry it to a mailbox — if she is a human being.

We emerge onto the square in front of the Northern Station in Moscow. Again my jailers are
newcomers to Moscow, and don't know the city. We travel on streetcar "B," and I make the de-
cisions for them. There is a mob at the streetcar stop in the middle of the square; everyone is on the
way to work at this hour. One jailer climbs up to the streetcar motorman and shows him his MVD
identity card. We are allowed to stand imposingly on the front platform for the whole trip, as if we
were deputies of the Moscow Soviet, and we don't bother to get tickets. An old man isn't allowed to
board there — he isn't an invalid and he has to board in the rear like the others.

We approach Novoslobodskaya and disembark — and for the first time I see Butyrki Prison from the
outside, even though it's the fourth time I've been brought there and I can draw its in- terior plan
without difficulty. Oof, what a grim, high wall stretches for two blocks there! The hearts of the
Muscovites shiver when they see the steel maw of its gates slide open. But I leave the sidewalks of
Moscow behind me without regret, and as I enter that tower of the gatehouse I feel I am returning
home. I smile at the first courtyard and recognize the familiar main doors of carved wood. And it's



nothing at all to me that they are now going to make me face the wall — and they already have — and
ask me: "Last name? Given name and patronymic? Year of birth?"

My name? I am the Interstellar Wanderer! They have tightly bound my body, but my soul is beyond
their power.

I know: after several hours of inevitable processing of my body — confinement in a box, search,
issuing receipts, filling out the admissions card, after the roaster and the bath — I shall be taken to a
cell with two domes, with a hanging arch in the middle (all the cells are like that), with two large
windows and a long combination table and cupboard. And I shall be greeted by strangers who are
certain to be intelligent, interesting, friendly people, and they will begin to tell me their stories, and I
will begin to tell them mine, and by night we will not even feel like going off to sleep right away.

And on the bowls will be stamped (so we shouldn't make off with them on the prisoner transport) the
mark "Bu-Tyur" — for fiwtyrskaya Tyurma, Butyrki Prison. The "BuTyur" Health Re- sort, as we
mocked it last time. A health resort, incidentally, very little known to the paunchy bigwigs who want
so badly to lose weight. They drag their stomachs to Kislovodsk, and go out for long hikes on
prescribed trails, do push-ups, and sweat for a whole month just to lose four to six pounds. And there
in the "BuTyur" Health Resort, right near them, anyone of them could lose seventeen or eighteen
pounds just like that, in one week, without doing any exercises at all.

This is a tried and true method. It has never failed.

One of the truths you learn in prison is that the world is small, very small indeed. True, the Gulag
Archipelago, although it ex- tended across the entire Soviet Union, had many fewer inhabi- tants
than the Soviet Union as a whole. How many there actually were in the Archipelago one cannot
know for certain. We can assume that at any one time there were not more than twelve million in the
camps (as some departed beneath the sod, the Machine kept bringing in replacements).

[According to the researches of the Social Democrats Nicolaevsky and Dallin, there were from
fifteen to twenty million prisoners in the camps.]

And not more than half of them were politicals. Six million? Well, that's a small country, Sweden or
Greece, and in such countries many people know one another. And quite naturally when you landed
in any cell of any transit prison and listened and chatted, you'd be cer- tain to discover you had
acquaintances in common with some of your cellmates. (And so D., after having spent more than a
year in solitary confinement, after Sukhanovka, after Ryumin's beat- ings and the hospital, could
land in a Lubyanka cell and give his name, and then and there a bright chap named F. could greet
him: "Aha, so now I know who you are!" "Where from?" D. shied away from him. "You are
mistaken." "Certainly not. You are that very same American, Alexander D., whom the bourgeois
press lied about, saying you had been kidnaped — and TASS denied it. I was free at the time and read
about it.")

I love that moment when a newcomer is admitted to the cell for the first time (not a novice who has

only recently been arrested and will inevitably be depressed and confused, but a veteran zek). And I
myself love to enter a new cell (nonetheless, God grant I never have to do it again) with an
unworried smile and an expansive gesture: "Hi, brothers!" I throw my bag on the bunks. "Well, so
what's new this past year in Butyrki?"

We begin to get acquainted. Some fellow named Suvorov, a 58. At first glance there's nothing
remarkable about him, but you probe and pry: at the Krasnoyarsk Transit Prison a certain Makhotkin
was in his cell.

"Just a moment, wasn't he an Arctic aviator?"



"Yes. They named . . ."



"... an island after him in the Taimyr Gulf. And he's in prison for 58-10. So does that mean they let
him go to Dudinka?"

"How do you know? Yes."

Wonderful! One more link in the biography of a man I don't know. I have never met him, and
perhaps I never shall. But my efficient memory has filed away everything I know about him:
Makhotkin got a whole "quarter" — twenty-five years — but the island named after him couldn't be
renamed because it was on all the maps of the world (it wasn't a Gulag island). They had taken him
on at the aviation sharashka in Bolshino and he was unhappy there: an aviator among engineers, and
not allowed to fly. They split that sharashka in two, and Makhotkin got assigned to the Taganrog
half, and it seemed as though all connection with him had been severed. In the other half of it,
however, in Rybinsk, I was told that he had asked to be allowed to fly in the Far North. And now I
had just learned he had been given that permission. This was not information I needed, but I had
remembered it all. And ten days later I turned up in the same Butyrki bath box (there are such lovely
boxes in the Butyrki, with faucets and small washtubs so as not to tie up the big bath chambers) as a
certain R. I didn't know this R. either, but it turned out he had been a patient in the Butyrki hospital
for half a year and was about to leave for the Rybinsk sharashka. In another three days the prisoners
in Rybinsk, too, a closed box where zeks are cut off from all ties with the outside world, would
nevertheless learn that Makhotkin was in Dudinka, and they would also find out where I had been
sent.

Now this is the prisoners' telegraph system: attentiveness, memory, chance meetings.

And this attractive man in horn-rimmed spectacles? He walked around the cell humming Schubert in
a pleasant baritone.

And youth again oppresses me,
And the way to the grave is long.

"Tsarapkin, Sergei Romano vich."

"But look here, I know you very well indeed. You're a biol- ogist? A nonreturnee? From Berlin?"
"How do you know?"

"But after all, it's a small world! In 1946 with Nikolai Vladimirovich Timofeyev-Ressovsky . . ."

Oh, what a cell that had been in 1946: The memories of it returned. It was perhaps the most brilliant

cell in all my prison life. It was July. They had taken me from the camp to the Butyrki on those
mysterious "instructions of the Minister of In- temal Affairs." We arrived after lunch, but the prison
was so overloaded that the reception processing took eleven hours, and it was not until 3 A.M. that,
tired from the boxes, I was admitted to Cell 75. Lit by two bright electric bulbs below the two
domes, the whole cell slept side by side, restless because of the stuffiness: the hot July air couldn't
circulate through the windows blocked by the "muzzles." Sleepless flies kept buzzing, and the
sleepers twitched when the flies lit on them. Some of the prisoners had put handkerchiefs over their
faces to keep the light out of their eyes. The latrine barrel smelled acrid — everything decayed more
quickly in such heat. Eighty people were stuffed into a cell for twenty-five — and this was not the
limit either. Prisoners lay tightly packed together on the bunks to left and right and also on the
supplementary planks laid across the aisle, and everywhere feet were sticking out from under the
bunks, and the traditional Butyrki table-cupboard was pushed back to the latrine barrel. That was
where there was still a piece of unoccupied floor, and that was where I lay down. And thus it was



that whoever got up to use the latrine barrel before morning had to step across me.

When the order "Get up!" was given, shouted through the swill trough in the door, everything started
to stir: They began to take up the planks from across the aisles and push the table to the window.
Prisoners came up to interview me — to find out whether I was a novice or a camp veteran. It turned
out that two different waves had met in the cell: the ordinary wave of freshly sentenced prisoners
being sent off to camp and a reverse wave of camp in- mates who were all technical specialists —
physicists, chemists, mathematicians, design engineers — all being sent to unknown destinations, to
some sort of thriving scientific research institutes. (At this point I relaxed: the Minister was not
going to hang a new stretch on me.) I was approached by a man who was middle- aged, broad-
shouldered yet very skinny, with a slightly aquiline nose:

"Professor Timofeyev-Ressovsky, President of the Scientific and Technical Society of Cell 75. Our
society assembles every day after the morning bread ration, next to the left window. Perhaps you
could deliver a scientific report to us? What precisely might it be?"

Caught unaware, I stood before him in my long bedraggled overcoat and winter cap (those arrested
in winter are foredoomed to go about in winter clothing during the summer too). My fingers had not
yet straightened out that morning and were all scratched. What kind of scientific report could I give?
And right then I remembered that in camp I had recently held in my hands for two nights the Smyth
Report, the official report of the United States Defense Department on the first atom bomb, which
had been brought in from outside. The book had been published that spring. Had anyone in the cell
seen it? It was a useless question. Of course no one had. And thus it was that fate played its joke,
compelling me, in spite of everything, to stray into nuclear physics, the same field in which I had
registered on the Gulag card.

After the rations were issued, the Scientific and Technical So- ciety of Cell 75, consisting of ten or
so people, assembled at the left window and I made my report and was accepted into the society. I
had forgotten some things, and I could not fully com- prehend others, and Timofeyev-Ressovsky,
even though he had been in prison for a year and knew nothing of the atom bomb, was able on
occasion to fill in the missing parts of my account. An empty cigarette pack was my blackboard, and
I held an illegal fragment of pencil lead. Nikolai Vladimirovich took them away from me and
sketched and interrupted, commenting with as much self-assurance as if he had been a physicist from
the Los Alamos group itself.

He actually had worked with one of the first European cyclo- trons, but for the purpose of irradiating

fruit flies. He was a biologist, one of the most important geneticists of our time. He had already been
in prison back when Zhebrak, not knowing that (or, perhaps, knowing it), had the courage to write in
a Canadian magazine: "Russian biology is not responsible for Lysenko; Russian biology is
Timofeyev-Ressovsky." (And during the destruction of Soviet biology in 1948 Zhebrak paid for
this.) Schrodinger, in his small book What Is Life?, twice cited Timofeyev-Ressovsky, who had long
since been imprisoned.

And there he was in front of us, and he was simply bursting with information concerning all possible
sciences. He had that breadth of scope which scientists of later generations don't even want to have.
(Or is it that the possibilities of encompassing knowledge have changed?) And even though at the
moment he was so worn down by the starvation of the interrogation period that these exercises were
very difficult for him. On his mother's side he was descended from impoverished Kaluga gentlefolk
who had lived on the Ressa River, and on his father's side he was a collateral descendant of Stepan
Razin, and that Cossack energy was very obvious in him — in his broad frame, in his basic sound-
ness, in his determined struggle with his interrogator, and also in the fact that he suffered from
hunger more than we did.

And his story was this: In 1922 the German scientist Vogt, who had founded the Brain Institute in



Moscow, had asked to have two talented graduate students sent abroad to work with him
permanently. And that was how Timofeyev-Ressovsky and his friend Tsarapkin had been sent off on
a foreign assignment with no time limit. And even though they did not have any ideological
guidance there, they nonetheless achieved great things in science, and when in 1937 (!) they were
instructed to return to their homeland, this seemed to them, since it meant inter- rupting their work,
impossible. They could not abandon either the logical continuation of their own researches or their
apparatus or their students. And, no doubt, they also couldn't do it because back in the Motherland
they would have been compelled to pour shit publicly all over their fifteen years of work in
Germany. And only that would have earned them the right to go on existing (and would it have
earned it for them?). And so they became non- returnees, remaining patriots nevertheless.

In 1945 the Soviet armies entered Buch (a northeast suburb of Berlin), and Timofeyev-Ressovsky
and his entire institute joyously welcomed them: everything had worked out in the best possible way,
and now he would not have to be separated from his institute! Soviet representatives came to inspect
it and said: "Hmm! hmm! Put everything in packing cases, and we'll take it all to Moscow." "That's
impossible," Timofeyev objected. "Every- thing will die on the way. The installations have taken
years to set up." "Hmm!" The bigwigs acted astonished. And very shortly after that Timofeyev and
Tsarapkin were arrested and taken off to Moscow. They were naive. They had thought that the
institute would not be able to operate without them. Well, even if it didn't operate, the general line of
the Party must triumph! In the Big Lubyanka it was very easily proven to the arrested individuals
that they were traitors of the Motherland (or to it?), and they were sentenced to ten years, and now
the President of the Scien- tific and Technical Society of Cell 75 took heart from the thought that he
hadn't made any errors.

In the Butyrki cells, the arched metal frames supporting the bunks were very, very low. Even the
prison administration had never thought of having prisoners sleep under them. Therefore, you first
tossed your neighbor your coat so that he could spread it out for you under there, and then you lay
face down in the aisle and crawled your way in. Prisoners walked through the aisle, the floor
underneath the bunks was swept maybe once a month, and you could wash your hands only during
the evening trip to the toilet, and even then without soap — and it was thus impossible to say that you
could perceive your body as a Divine vessel. But I was happy! There, on the asphalt floor, under the
bunks, in a dog's den, with dust and crumbs from the bunks falling in our eyes, I was absolutely
happy, without any qualifications. Epicurus spoke truly: Even the absence of variety can be sensed
as satisfaction when a variety of dissatisfactions has preceded it. After camp, which had already
seemed endless, and after a ten-hour workday, after cold, rain, and aching back, oh, what happiness
it was to lie there for whole days on end, to sleep, and nevertheless receive a pound and a half of
bread and two hot meals a day — made from cattle feed, or from dolphin's flesh. In a word, the
"BuTyur" Health Resort.

To sleep was so important! To lie there on one's belly, to cover one's back and just to sleep. When
you were asleep, you didn't spend your strength nor torment your heart — and meanwhile your
sentence was passing, passing. When our life crackles and sparks like a torch, we curse the necessity
of spending eight hours uselessly in sleep. When we have been deprived of everything, when we
have been deprived of hope, then bless you, fourteen hours of sleep!

But they kept me in that cell two months, and I slept enough to make up for the past year and the
year ahead, and during that time I moved forward under the bunks to the window and then all the
way back to the latrine barrel, but on the bunks this time, and then on the bunks I moved to the
archway. I was sleeping very little by this time — I was gulping down the elixir of life and enjoying
myself. In the morning the Scientific and Technical So- ciety, then chess, books (oh, those itinerant
books, there were only three or four for eight or ten people, and there was always a waiting list for
them), then a twenty-minute walk outdoors — a major chord! We never refused our walk even when
it was raining heavily. And the main thing was people, people, people! Nikolai Audrey evich
Semyonov, one of the creators of the Dnieper Hy- droelectric Dam and Power Station. His POW



Mend, the engineer F. F. Karpov. Witty, caustic Viktor Kagan, a physicist. The musician and
conservatory student Volodya Klempner, a com- poser. A woodcutter and hunter from the Vyatka
forests, as pro- found as a forest lake. An Orthodox preacher from Europe, Yevgeny Ivanovich
Divnich. He did not confine himself to theology, but condemned Marxism, declaring that no one in
Europe had taken it seriously for a long while — and I defended it, because after all I was a Marxist.
And even a year ago I would have confidently demolished him with quotations; how disparagingly I
would have mocked him! But my first year as a prisoner had left its mark inside me — and just when
had that happened? I hadn't noticed: there had been so many new events, sights, meanings, that I
could no longer say: "They don't exist! That's a bourgeois lie!" And now I had to admit: "Yes, they
do exist." And right at that point my whole line of reasoning began to weaken, and so they could beat
me in our arguments without half-trying.

And again the POW's kept coming and coming and coming — this was the second year of the wave
of them that kept unceasingly coming from Europe. And once more there were Russian emigres —
from Europe, from Manchuria. One went about among the emigres seeking news of acquaintances
by first asking what country they had come from, and did they know so and so? Yes, of course, they
did. (And that is how I learned of the execution of Colonel Yasevich.)

And the old German, that portly German, now emaciated and ill, whom I had once upon a time back
in East Prussia (was it two hundred years ago?) forced to carry my suitcase. Oh, how small the world
really is! Strange fate that brought us together again! The old man smiled at me. He recognized me
too, and even seemed pleased by our meeting. He had forgiven me. He had been sentenced to ten
years, but he certainly didn't have anywhere near that long to live. And there was another German
there too- lanky and young, but unresponsive — perhaps because he didn't know one word of Russian.
You wouldn't even take him for a German right off the bat: the thieves had torn off everything
German he had on and given him a faded old Soviet field shirt in exchange. He was a famous
German air ace. His first campaign had been in the war between Bolivia and Paraguay, his second in
Spain, his third Poland, his fourth over England, his fifth Cyprus, his sixth the Soviet Union. Since
he was an ace he could certainly not have avoided shooting down women and children from the air!
That made him a war criminal and he got a prison sentence and a "muzzle" of five additional years.
And, of course, there had to be one right-thinking person (like Prosecutor Kretov) in the cell: "They
were right to imprison all you counterrevolu- tionary bastards! History will grind up your bones for
fertilizer!" "You're going to be fertilizer yourself, you dog!" they shouted back. "No, they will
reconsider my case. I am innocent!" And the whole cell howled and seethed. And a gray-haired
Russian- language teacher stood up on the bunks, barefoot, and wrung his hands like a latter-day
Jesus Christ: "Children of mine, make peace with one another! My children!" And they howled at
him too: "Your children are in the Bryansk forests! We are nobody's children! All we are is the sons
of Gulag,"

After dinner and the evening trip to the toilet, night cloaked the window "muzzles" and the nagging
electric lights below the ceiling lit up. Day divided the prisoners and night drew them closer
together. There were no quarrels in the evening: lectures and concerts were given. And in this, too,
Timofeyev-Ressovsky shone: he spent entire evenings on Italy, Denmark, Norway, Sweden. The
emigres spoke about the Balkans, about France. Someone delivered a lecture on Le Corbusier.
Someone else delivered one on the habits of bees. Someone else on Gogol. This was when we
smoked our lungs full. Smoke filled up the cell and hovered in the air like a fog, and there was no
draft to pull it out the window because of the "muzzles." Kostya Kiula, twin to me in age, round-
faced, blue-eyed, amusingly awkward, stepped up to the table and recited to us the verses he had
composed in prison.

[Kostya Kiula doesn't respond, he's disappeared. I am afraid he is not among the Uving.]

His voice broke with emotion. His verses were entitled, "My First Food Parcel," "To My Wife," "To
My Son." When in prison you strain to get by ear verses written in prison, you don't waste a single



thought on whether the author's use of syllabic stress is faulty and whether his lines end in
assonances or full rhymes. These verses are the blood of your own heart, the tears of your own wife.
The cell wept.

In that cell I myself set out to write verses about prison. And it was there that I recited the verses of
Yesenin, who had almost but not quite been on the forbidden list before the war. And young Bubnov,
a POW, and before that, apparently, a student who had not completed his studies, worshipfuUy gazed
at those reciting, his face aglow. He was not a technical specialist and he hadn't come from camp, but
was on his way there, and because of the purity and forthrightness of his character he would in all
likelihood die there. People like him don't survive there. And for him and for others — their fatal
descent braked for the moment — the evenings in Cell 75 were a sudden revelation of that beauti- ful
world which exists and will continue to exist but which their own hard fate hadn't given them one
little year of, not even one little year of their young Uves.

The swill trough dropped down and the turnkey's mug barked at us: "Bed." No, even before the war,
when I was studying at two higher educational institutions at the same time and earning my way by
tutoring, and striving to write too, even then I had not experienced such full, such heart-rending, such
completely filled days, as I did in Cell 75 that summer.

"But listen," I said to Tsarapkin, "I've heard since then from someone called Deul, a sixteen-year-old
boy who got di fiver (not on a school report card) for 'anti-Soviet' propaganda. . . ."

"What, do you know him too? He was on our prisoner trans- port to Karaganda. .. ."

"... I heard," I continued, "that you were given work as a laboratory assistant doing medical analyses
and that Timofeyev- Ressovsky was constantly being sent out on general-assignment work. . ."

"Yes, and he grew very weak. He was half -dead when they brought him from the Stolypin car here
to the Butyrki. And he is in a hospital bed here right now, and the Fourth Special De- partment is
issuing him cream and even wine, but it's hard to say whether he will ever get back on his feet
again."

[ The task of the Fourth Special Department of the MVD was to solve scientific problems, using
prisoners.]

"Did the Fourth Special Department summon you?"

"Yes. They asked us whether we considered it might still be possible after six months of Karaganda
to start setting up our in- stitute here, in the Fatherland."

"And you, of course, agreed enthusiastically."

"Most certainly! After all, we have come to understand our mistakes. And besides, all the equipment
wrenched from its original place and put into packing cases got here even with- out us."

"What dedication to science on the part of the MVD! May I ask for a little more Schubert?"

And Tsarapkin sang softly, staring sadly at the window (his spectacles reflecting both their dark
"muzzles" and their light upper sections):

Vom Abendrot zum Morgenlicht
ward mancher Kopf zum Greise.
Wer glaubt es? Meiner ward es nicht
auf dieser ganzen Reise.



Tolstoi's dream has come true: Prisoners are no longer compelled to attend pernicious religious
services. The prison churches have been shut down. True, their buildings remain, but they have been
successfully adapted to enlarge the prisons themselves. Two thousand additional prisoners have
thereby been housed in the Butyrki church — and in the course of a year, estimating an aver- age
turnover of two weeks, another fifty thousand will pass through the cells in what was once the
church.

On arriving at the Butyrki for the fourth or fifth time, hurrying confidently to my assigned cell,
through the courtyard surrounded by prison buildings, and even outstripping the jailer by a shoulder
(like a horse that hurries, without the urging of whip or reins, home to where the oats are waiting), I
sometimes even forgot to glance at the square church rising into an octagon. It stood apart in the
middle of the courtyard quadrangle. Its "muzzles" were not machine-made of glass reinforced with
iron rods as they were in the main section of the prison. They were rotten, un- planed gray boards,
pure and simple — and they indicated the building's second-rank priority. What they maintained there
was a kind of intra-Butyrki transit prison, so to speak, for recently sentenced prisoners.

And at one time, in 1945, 1 had experienced it as a big, im- portant step when they led us into the
church after our OSO sentencing (and that was the right time to do it too! — it was a good time for
prayer!), took us up to the second floor (and the third floor was also partitioned off), and from the
octagonal vestibule distributed us among different cells. Mine was the southeast cell.

This was a large square cell in which, at the time, two hun- dred prisoners were confined. They were
sleeping, as they did everywhere else there, on the bunks (and they were one-story bunks), under the
bunks, and just simply on the tile floor, out in the aisles. Not only were the "muzzles" on the
windows second- rate; everything else, too, was in a style appropriate not to true sons of Butyrki but
to its stepsons. No books, no chess sets, no checkers were distributed to this swarming mass, and the
dented aluminum bowls and beat-up wooden spoons were collected and removed from one mealtime
to another for fear that in the rush they might get carried off on prisoner transports. They were even
stingy with mugs for the stepsons. They washed the bowls after the gruel, and then the prisoners had
to lap up their tea slops out of them. The absence of one's own dishes was particularly acute for those
who experienced the mixed blessing of receiving a parcel from their families (despite their meager
means, relatives made a special effort to provide parcels in those last days before the prisoner
transports left). The families had had no prison ed- ucation themselves, and they never got any good
advice in the prison reception office either. And therefore they didn't send plastic dishes, the one and
only kind prisoners were allowed to have, but glass or metal ones instead. All these honeys, jams,
condensed milks were pitilessly poured and scraped out of their cans through the swill trough in the
cell door into whatever the prisoner had, and in the church cells he had nothing at all, which meant
that he simply got it in the palms of his hands, in his mouth, in his handkerchief, in the flaps of his
coat — which was quite normal in Gulag terms, but not in the center of Moscow!

And at the same time the jailer kept hurrying him as if he were late for his train. (The jailer hurried
him because he was counting on licking out whatever was left in the jars.) Everything was temporary
in the church cells, without that illusion of permanency which existed in the interrogation cells and
in the cells where prisoners awaited sentencing. Ground meat, a semiprocessed product partially
prepared for Gulag, the prisoners were unavoid- ably here those few days until a bit of space had
been cleared for them at Krasnaya Presnya. They had just one special privilege here: three times a
day they were allowed to go for their gruel themselves (no grits were given out here, but the gruel
was served three times a day, and this was a merciful thing because it was more frequent, hotter, and
stuck to the ribs better). This special privilege was allowed because there were no elevators in the
church — as there were in the rest of the prison. And the jailers had no wish to exert themselves. The
big heavy kettles had to be carried from a long way off, across the yard, and then up a steep flight of
stairs. It was hard work, and the prisoners had very little strength for it, but they went willingly — just
to get out into the green yard one more time and hear the birds singing.



The church cells had their own air: it held a fluttering presenti- ment of the drafts of future transit
prisons, of the winds of the Arctic camps. In the church cells you celebrated the ritual of getting
adjusted — to the fact that your sentence had been handed down and that it wasn't in the least a joke;
to the fact that no matter how cruel the new era of your life might be, your mind must nevertheless
digest and accept it. And you arrived at that with great difficulty.

And you had no permanent cellmates here as you did in the interrogation cells — which made the
latter something like a family. Day and night, people were brought in and taken away singly and by
tens, and as a result the prisoners kept moving ahead along the floor and along the bunks, and it was
rare to lie next to any one neighbor for more than two nights. Once you met an interesting person
there you had to question him immediately, because otherwise you would miss out for good and all.

And that is how I missed out on the automobile mechanic Medvedev. When I began to talk to him, I
remembered that his name had been mentioned by the Emperor Mikhail. Yes, he had indeed been
implicated in the same case as Mikhail, because he had been one of the first to read the "Manifesto to
the Russian People" — and had failed to write a denunciation. Medvedev had been given an
unforgivably, shamefully light sentence — three years. And under Article 58, too, for which even five
years was considered a juvenile sentence. They had evidently decided the Emperor was really insane,
and had been easy on the rest of them because of class considerations. But I had hardly pulled
myself together to ask how Medvedev regarded all this than they took him off "with his things."
Certain circumstances led us to con- elude that he had been taken off to be released. And this con-
firmed those first rumors of the Stalinist amnesty which reached our ears that summer, the amnesty
for no one, an amnesty after which everything was just as crowded as before — even under the bunks.

They took my neighbor, an elderly Schutzbiindler, off to a prisoner transport. (Here in the land of the
world proletariat, all those Schutzbiindlers who had been suffocating in conservative Austria had
been roasted with "tenners," and on the islands of the Archipelago they met their end.) And there
was a swarthy little fellow with coal-black hair and feminine-looking eyes like dark cherries, but
with a broad, larger than usual nose that spoiled his whole face, turning it into a caricature. For a day
he and I lay next to each other in silence, and on the second day he found occasion to ask me: "What
do you think I am?" He spoke Russian correctly and fluently, but with an accent. I hesitated: there
seemed to be something of Transcaucasia in him, Armenian presumably. He smiled: "I used to pass
myself off very easily as a Georgian. My name was Yasha. Everyone laughed at me. I collected
trade-union dues." I looked him over. His was truly a comical figure: a half-pint, his face out of
proportion, asym- metrical, his smile amiable. And then suddenly he tensed up, his features
sharpened, his eyes narrowed and cut me like the stroke of a black saber.

"I am an intelligence officer of the Rumanian General Staff! Lieutenant Vladimirescu!"

I started — this was real dynamite. I had met a couple of hun- dred fabricated spies, and I had never
thought I might meet up with a real one. I thought they didn't exist.

According to his story, he was of an aristocratic family. From the age of three he had been destined
to serve on the General Staff. At six he had entered the intelligence service school. Growing up, he
had picked his own field of future activity — the Soviet Union, taking into account that here in Russia
the most relentless counterintelligence service in the world existed and that it was particularly
difficult to work here because everyone suspected everyone else. And, he now concluded, he had
worked here not at all badly. He had spent several prewar years in Nikolayev and, it appears, had
arranged for the Rumanian armies to capture a shipyard intact. Subsequently he had been at the
Stalingrad Tractor Factory, and after that at the Urals Heavy Machinery Factory. In the course of
collecting trade-union dues he had entered the office of the chief of a major division of the plant, had
shut the door behind him, and his idiotic smile had promptly left his face, and that saber-sharp
cutting expression had appeared: "Ponomaryev! [And Ponomaryev was using an altogether different
name at the Urals Heavy Machinery Factory.] We have been keeping track of you from Stalingrad



on. You left your job there. [He had been some kind of bigwig at the Stalingrad Tractor Factory.]
And you have set yourself up here under an assumed name. You can choose — to be shot by your
own people or to work with us." Ponomaryev chose to work with them, and that indeed was very
much in the style of those supersuccessful pigs.

The lieutenant supervised his work until he himself was trans- ferred to the jurisdiction of the
German intelligence officer resi- dent in Moscow, who sent him to Podolsk to work at his specialty.
As Vladimirescu explained to me, intelligence officers and sa- boteurs are given an all-round
training, but each of them has his own narrow area of specialization. And Vladimirescu's special
field was cutting the main cord of a parachute on the inside. In Podolsk he was met at the parachute
warehouse by the chief of the warehouse guard (who was it? what kind of person was he?), who at
night let Vladimirescu into the warehouse for eight hours. Climbing up to the piles of parachutes on
his ladder and manag- ing not to disturb the piles, Vladimirescu pulled out the braided main support-
cord and, with special scissors, cut four-fifths of the way through it, leaving one-fifth intact, so that it
would break in the air. Vladimirescu had studied many long years in preparation for this one night.
And now, working feverishly, in the course of eight hours he ruined, according to his account,
upwards of two thousand parachutes (fifteen seconds per parachute?). "I de- stroyed a whole Soviet
parachute division!" His cherry like eyes sparkled with malice.

When he was arrested, he refused to give any testimony for eight whole months — imprisoned in the
Butyrki, he uttered not one word. "And didn't they torture you?" "No!" His lips twitched as though to
indicate he didn't even consider such a thing possible in the case of a non-Soviet citizen. (Beat your
own people so foreigners will be more afraid of you! But a real spy's a gold mine! After all, we may
have to use him for an exchange.) The day came when they showed him the newspapers: Rumania
had capitulated; come on, now, testify. He continued to keep silent: the newspapers could have been
forgeries. They showed him an order of the Rumanian General Staff: under the conditions of the
armistice the General Staff ordered all its intelligence agents to cease operations and surrender. He
continued to keep silent. (The order could have been a forgery.) Finally he was con- fronted with his
immediate superior on the General Staff, who ordered him to disclose his information and surrender.
At this point Vladimirescu coldbloodedly gave his testimony, and now, in the slow passing of the
cell day, it was no longer of any im- portance and he told me some of it too. They had not even tried
him! They had not even given him a sentence! (After all, he wasn't one of our own! "I am a career
man — and will remain one until I die. And they won't waste me.")

"But you are revealing yourself to me," I pointed out. "I might very well remember your face. Just
imagine our meeting someday in public."

"If I am convinced that you haven't recognized me, you will remain alive. If you recognize me, I will
kill you, or else force you to work for us."

He had not the slightest desire to spoil his relationship with his cell neighbor. He said this very
simply, with total conviction. I was really convinced that he wouldn't hesitate for a moment to gun
someone down or cut their throat.

In this whole long prisoners' chronicle, we will not again meet such a hero. It was the only encounter
of the sort I ever had in my eleven years of prison, camp, and exile, and others didn't even have one.
And our mass-circulation comics try to dupe young people into believing that these are the only
people the Organs catch.

It was enough to look around that church cell to grasp that it was youth itself the Organs were
catching in the first place. The war had ended, and we could allow ourselves the luxury of ar- resting
everyone who had been singled out: they were no longer needed as soldiers. They said that in 1944
and 1945 a so-called "Democratic Party" had passed through the cells of the Small (Moscow
Province) Lubyanka. According to rumor, it had consisted of half a hundred boys, had its own



statutes and its membership cards. The eldest of them was a pupil in the tenth grade of a Moscow
school, and he was its "general secretary." Students were also glimpsed fleetingly in the prisons
during the last year of the war. I met some here and there. I was pre- sumably not old myself, but
they at any rate were younger.

How imperceptibly all that crept up on us! While we — I, my codefendant, and others of our age —
had been fighting for four years at the front, a whole new generation had grown up here in the rear.
And had it been very long since we ourselves had tramped the parquet floors of the university
corridors, consider- ing ourselves the youngest and most intelligent in the whole country and, for that
matter, on earth? And then suddenly pale youths crossed the tile floors of the prison cells to approach
us haughtily, and we learned with astonishment that we were no longer the youngest and most
intelligent — they were. But I didn't take offense at this; at that point I was already happy to move
over a bit to make room. I knew so very well their passion for arguing with everyone, for finding out
everything, I understood their pride in having chosen a worthy lot and in not regretting it. It gave me
gooseflesh to hear the rustle of the prison halos hover- ing over those self -enamored and intelligent
little faces.

One month earlier, in another Butyrki cell, a semihospital cell, I had just stepped into the aisle and
had still not seen any empty place for myself — when, approaching in a way that hinted at a verbal
dispute, even at an entreaty to enter into one, came a pale, yellowish youth, with a Jewish tenderness
of face, wrapped, despite the summer, in a threadbare soldier's overcoat shot full of holes: he was
chilled. His name was Boris Gammerov. He began to question me; the conversation rolled along: on
one hand, our biographies, on the other, politics. I don't remember why, but I recalled one of the
prayers of the late President Roosevelt, which had been published in our newspapers, and I
expressed what seemed to me a self-evident evaluation of it:

"Well, that's hypocrisy, of course."

And suddenly the young man's yellowish brows trembled, his pale lips pursed, he seemed to draw
himself up, and he asked me: "Why? Why do you not admit the possibility that a political leader
might sincerely believe in God?"

And that is all that was said! But what a direction the attack had come from! To hear such words
from someone born in 1923? I could have replied to him very firmly, but prison had already
undermined my certainty, and the principal thing was that some kind of clean, pure feeling does live
within us, existing apart from all our convictions, and right then it dawned upon me that I had not
spoken out of conviction but because the idea had been im- planted in me from outside. And because
of this I was unable to reply to him, and I merely asked him: "Do you believe in God?"

"Of course," he answered tranquilly.

Of course? Of course . . . Yes, yes. The Komsomols were flying ahead of the flock — everywhere, but
so far only the NKGB had noticed.

Notwithstanding his youth, Borya Gammerov had not only fought as a sergeant in an antitank unit
with those antitank 45's the soldiers had christened "Farewell, Motherland!" He had also been
wounded in the lungs and the wound had not yet healed, and because of this TB had set in.
Gammerov was given a medical discharge from the army and enrolled in the biology department of
Moscow University. And thus two strands intertwined in him: one from his life as a soldier and the
other from the by no means foohsh and by no means dead students' life at war's end. A circle formed
of those who thought and reasoned about the future (even though no one had given them any
instructions to do so), and the experienced eye of the Organs singled out three of them and pulled
them in. (In 1937, Gammerov's father had been killed in prison or shot, and his son was hurrying
along the same path. During the interrogation he had read several of his own verses to the



interrogator with feeling. And I deeply regret that I have not managed to remember even one of
them, and there is nowhere to seek them out today. Otherwise I would have cited them here.)

For a number of months after that my path crossed those of all three codefendants: right there in a
Butyrki cell I met Vyacheslav D. — and there is always someone like him when young people are
arrested: he had taken an iron stand within the group, but he quickly broke down under interrogation.
He got less than any of the others — five years — and it looked as though he were secretly counting a
good deal on his influential papa to get him out.

And then in the Butyrki church I encountered Georgi Ingal, the eldest of the three. Despite his youth,
he was already a candi- date-member of the Union of Soviet Writers. He had a very bold pen. His
style was one of strong contrasts. If he had been willing to make his peace politically, vivid and
untrodden literary paths would have opened up before him. He had already nearly finished a novel
about Debussy. But his early success had not emasculated him, and at the funeral of his teacher, Yuri
Tynyanov, he had made a speech declaring that Tynyanov had been persecuted — and by this means
had assured himself of an eight-year term.

And right then Gammerov caught up with us, and, while wait- ing to go to Krasnaya Presnya, I had
to face up to their united point of view. This confrontation was not easy for me. At the time I was
committed to that world outlook which is incapable of admitting any new fact or evaluating any new
opinion before a label has been found for it from the already available stock: be it the "hesitant
duplicity of the petty bourgoisie," or the "militant nihilism of the declasse intelligentsia." I don't
recall that Ingal and Gammerov attacked Marx in my presence, but I do remember how they attacked
Lev Tolstoi, and from what direction the attack was launched! Tolstoi rejected the church? But he
failed to take into account its mystical and its organizing role. He rejected the teachings of the Bible?
But for the most part modern science was not in conflict with the Bible, not even with its opening
lines about the creation of the world. He rejected the state? But without the state there would be
chaos. He preached the combining of mental and physical work in one individual's life? But that was
a senseless leveling of capabilities and talents. And, finally, as we see from Stalin's violence, an
historical per- sonage can be omnipotent, yet Tolstoi scoffed at the very idea.

[In my preprison and prison years I, too, had long ago come to the conclusion that Stalin had set the
course of the Soviet state in a fateful direc- tion. But then Stalin died quietly — and did the ship of
state change course very noticeably? The personal, individual imprint he left on events consisted of
dismal stupidity, petty tyranny, self-glorification. And in all the rest he followed the beaten path
exactly as it had been signposted, step by step.] The boys read me their own verses and demanded
mine in exchange, and I as yet had none. They read Pasternak particu- larly, whom they praised to
the skies. I had once read "My Sister Life" and hadn't liked it, considering it precious, abstruse, and
very, very far from ordinary human paths. But they recited to me Lieutenant Shmidt's last speech at
his trial, and it touched me deeply because it applied so to us:

For thirty years I have nurtured
My love for my native land,
And I shall neither expect
Nor miss your leniency.

Gammerov and Ingal were just as shiningly attuned as that: We do not need your leniency! We are
not languishing from imprison- ment; we are proud of it. (But who is really capable of not lan-
guishing? After a few months Ingal's young wife renounced and abandoned him. Gammerov,
because of his revolutionary inclina- tions, did not even have a sweetheart yet.) Was it not here, in
these prison cells, that the great truth dawned? The cell was con- stricted, but wasn't freedom even
more constricted? Was it not our own people, tormented and deceived, that lay beside us there under
the bunks and in the aisles?



Not to arise with my whole land
Would have been harder still,
And for the path that I have trod
I have no qualms at all.

The young people imprisoned in these cells under the political articles of the Code were never the
average young people of the nation, but were always separated from them by a wide gap. In those
years most of our young people still faced a future of "dis- integrating," of becoming disillusioned,
indifferent, falling in love with an easy life — and then, perhaps, beginning all over again the bitter
climb from that cozy little valley up to a new peak- possibly after another twenty years? But the
young prisoners of 1945, sentenced under 58-10, had leaped that whole future chasm of indifference
in one jump — and bore their heads boldly erect under the ax.

In the Butyrki church, the Moscow students, already sentenced, cut off and estranged from
everything, wrote a song, and before twilight sang it in their uncertain voices:

Three times a day we go for gruel,
The evenings we pass in song.
With a contraband prison needle
We sew ourselves bags for the road.

We don't care about ourselves any more.
We signed — just to be quicker!
And when will we ever return here again
From the distant Siberian camps?

Good Lord, how could we have missed the main point of the whole thing? While we had been
plowing through the mud out there on the bridgeheads, while we had been cowering in shell holes
and pushing binocular periscopes above the bushes, back home a new generation had grown up and
gotten moving. But hadn't it started moving in another direction? In a direction we wouldn't have
been able and wouldn't have dared to move in? They weren't brought up the way we were.

Our generation would return — having turned in its weapons, jingling its heroes' medals, proudly
telling its combat stories. And our younger brothers would only look at us contemptuously: Oh, you
stupid dolts!

END OF PART II

Translator's Notes

These translator's notes are not intended to overlap the extensive explanatory and reference material
contained in the author's own notes in the text and in the glossary which follows. They attempt to
give that minimum of factual material about this book and the whole work of which it is a part which
will enable the reader better to put it in perspective and understand what it is, and also to deal with
several areas of special Russian terminology.

The glossary which follows these notes can be very useful. It gives in alphabetical order capsule
identification of persons, institutions and their acronyms, political movements, and events mentioned
in the text.

The title of the book in Russian — Arkhipelag GULag — has a resonance resulting from a rhyme
which cannot be rendered in English.



The image evoked by this title is that of one far-flung "country" with millions of "natives,"
consisting of an archipelago of islands, some as tiny as a detention cell in a railway station and
others as vast as a large Western European country, contained within another country — the U.S.S.R.
This archipelago is made up of the enormous network of penal institutions and all the rest of the web
of machinery for police oppression and terror imposed throughout the author's period of reference on
all Soviet life. Gulag is the acronym for the Chief Administration of Corrective Labor Camps which
supervised the larger part of this system.

The author's decision to publish this work was triggered by a tragedy of August, 1973: A Leningrad
woman to whom the author had entrusted a portion of his manuscript for safekeeping broke down
after 120 sleepless hours of intensive questioning by Soviet Security officers and revealed where she
had hidden it — enabling them to seize it. Thereupon, in her desperation and depression, she
committed suicide. It is to this event that the author refers in the statement that precedes the text:
"Now that State Security has seized the book anyway, I have no alternative but to publish it
immediately."

This present English-language edition of Parts I and II of The Gulag Archipelago differs very
slightly, as a result of author's corrections and other corrections, from the Russian-language first
edition of these parts which was published by the YMCA-Press in Paris in late December, 1973.

The Gulag Archipelago is a sweeping, panoramic work which consists in all of seven parts divided
into three volumes — of which this present book, the first volume, contains two parts, representing
about one-third of the whole.

One of the important aspects of Solzhenitsyn as a Russian literary figure is his contribution to the
revival and expansion of the Russian literary language through introducing readers in his own
country (and abroad) to the language, terminology, and slang of camps, prisons, the police, and the
underworld. Millions of Soviet citizens became fully familiar with a whole new vocabulary through
imprisonment. But this vocabulary did not find its way into Russian literature until Solzhenitsyn put
it there — to the bewilderment of some of the uninitiated.

In this category there are terms in this book which require explanation.

Soviet Security services personnel, for example, are referred to in a variety of special epithets, some
of them carrying overtones of contempt. Most of these have been manufactured from the various
initials, at one time and another, of the basic Soviet secret police organization:

The oldest of these terms is, of course, "Chekist" — pronounced "Che-keest," with the accent on the
last syllable — from "Cheka." Though the name "Cheka" was replaced more than half a century ago,
this label for Soviet Security personnel is still used — and is much beloved by the personnel of the
Organs themselves.

"Gaybist," which is pronounced "gay-beest," with the accent on the last syllable, is derived from the
letters "g" and "b" standing for State Security.

Likewise "Gaybeshnik" — pronounced "gay-besh-neek," with the accent on the second syllable.

"Emvaydeshnik" — pronounced as it is spelled here, with the accent on the third syllable — is derived
similarly from the Russian pronunciation of the letters "M" "V" "D" — for Ministry of Internal
Affairs.

"Gaypayooshnik" — accent also on the third syllable — comes from "G" "P" "U" or "Gaypayoo."
"Osobist" — pronounced "oh-so-beest," with accent on the last syllable — is an officer of the Special



Branch, representing State Security, usually in a military unit — the "Osoby Otdel."

All these terms have their pungent flavor, which comes through even to the English-speaking
reader — and they have therefore often been used as is in the text of this translation.

In the Gulag world there was one particular type of police official who had special significance. This
was the "operupolnomochenny" — "oper" for short. Literally rendered, this title means "operations
plenipotentiary" — the operations being Security operations, often in a forced-labor camp, where he
had enormous power deriving from the fact that he represented State Security in an institution under
the Ministry of Internal Affairs. His nickname among the prisoners was "Kum," which can be
translated approximately as "godfather" or "father confessor." He was in charge of all camp stool
pigeons and he had responsibility for the political supervision of all the prisoners. Throughout this
work his title has been translated as "Security operations officer" or more usually just "Security
officer," or "Security chief."

The Russian thieves are not just plain ordinary thieves, but constitute a whole underworld subculture
which gets much attention and is well described in this book. The Russian thieves are "vory" —
meaning thieves. They are also the "blatnye" (plural); "blatnoi" is the masculine singular form and
also the adjective, describing a thing or person attached to the underworld or to the law or
companionship of thieves.

The Russian thieves are also the "blatari" and the "urki." They are also "tsvetnye" — in other words
"colored." And a person "polutsvetnoi" — "half-colored" or "mulatto" — is a non-thief who has begun
to take up the ways of the thieves.

By and large, to the extent that these and other terms appear in their original form in this translation
they are clearly enough explained. But wherever the word "thief" appears it means one of the
"blatnye."

The language of the Russian thieves is used in this work to refer to much more than themselves.

Thus a nonthief in thief language is a "frayer." By virtue of being a nonthief he is also naturally "a
mark," "a cull," "a pigeon," "an innocent," "a sucker." In this translation, "frayer" has been rendered
throughout as "sucker."

Some other terms that relate to the world of Gulag require special explanation:

At times in the text "ugolovniki" (which we have translated as "habitual criminals") and
"bytoviki" (which we have translated as "nonpolitical offenders") have been grouped together in
contrast to the political prisoners.

A "bytovik" is any prisoner who is not a political nor one of the Russian thieves — and the "bytoviki"
or "nonpolitical offenders" make up the enormous main mass of the prisoners. The distinction here is
just as much psychological as legal, and in English there is nothing that exactly translates this
Russian term.

The "ugolovniki" or "habitual criminals" are obviously professionals and therefore approximately the
same as the thieves.

Chapter 3 in Part I is entitled in Russian "Sledstviye." The correct, legally formal rendering of this
word into English would be "investigation." The official conducting the "investigation" is a
"sledovatel" or, again in the formal rendering, "investigator." I have, however, chosen, deliberately
and after consideration and consultation, generally to translate these Russian terms respectively as
"interrogation" and "interrogator." The text of the book makes the reason amply clear. There was in



the period and the cases described here no content of "investigation" in this process, nor was there
anyone who could legitimately be called an "investigator." There was interrogation and there were
interrogators.

In camps prisoners were divided into those who went out on general-assignment work every day —
and therefore died off — and those who got "cushy" jobs within the camp compound at office work,
as hospital orderlies, as cooks, bread cutters, assistants in the mess hall, etc., etc. — and thereby were
in a better position to survive. These latter were contemptuously christened by the other prisoners
"pridurki" — derived from a verb meaning to shirk general-assignment work. I have here translated
"pridurki" as "trusties". As in many other cases there is no exact English equivalent, but this is
certainly as close as there is.

Anyone who wishes to delve further into the lingo of Russian thieves and camps can well make use
of the valuable book Soviet Prison Camp Speech, a Survivor's Glossary, compiled by Meyer Galler
and Harlan E. Marquess, University of Wisconsin Press, 1972.

I wish to thank those who have given me invaluable assistance with this translation — and in the first
place and in particular Frances Lindley, my experienced, able, and long-suffering editor at Harper &
Row; Dick Passmore, my brilliant copy editor; Theodore Shabad, who has labored long and
industriously over the glossary and details in footnotes and text; and also Nina Sobolev, for her long
faithful hours of help of all kinds.

Michael Scammell, the well-known British translator and editor, was kind enough to come to New
York during the final stages of the preparation of this manuscript and provide the benefit of his own
considerable experience in giving the text one last thorough and most useful going over. I am deeply
grateful to him.

There are several others who have done more for this project than I can possibly thank them for. But
I can at least try — in the knowledge that they will know whom I mean when they read these lines.

Yet with all this, if there are faults in this translation, as no doubt there are, mine is the
responsibility.

T.P.W.

Glossary
NAMES

Abakumov, Viktor Semyonovich (1894-1954). Stalin's Minister of State Security, 1946-1952.
Executed in December, 1954, under Khrushchev.

Agranov, Yakov Savlovich (7-1939). Deputy People's Commissar of Internal Affairs under Yagoda
and Yezhov. Played important role in preparing show trials of 1936-1938. Shot in purges.

Aikhenvald, Yuli Isayevich (1872-1928). Critic and essayist, translated Schopenhauer into Russian.
Exiled in 1922.

Akhmatova (Gorenko), Anna Andreyevna (1889-1966). Acmeist poet, wife of Nikolai Gumilyev.
Denounced in 1946 as "alien to the Soviet people." Long unpublished in Soviet Union; some works
published after 1956.

Aldanov (Landau), Mark Aleksandrovich (1886-1957). Writer of historical novels; emigrated 1919



to Paris, and later to New York.

Aldan-Semyonov, Andrei Ignatyevich (1908-). Soviet writer; imprisoned in Far East camps, 1938-
1953. Author of memoirs.

Aleksandrov, A. I. Head of Arts Section of AU-Union Society for Cultural Relations with Foreign
Countries; purged in 1935.

Alliluyevs. Family of Stalin's second wife, Nadezhda Sergeyevna.

Amfiteatrov, Aleksandr Valentino vich (1862-1938). Russian writer; emigrated 1920.

Anders, Wladyslaw (1892-1970). Polish general; formed Polish military units in Soviet Union and
led them out to Iran in 1943.

Andreyev, Leonid Nikolayevich (1871-1919). Playwright and short story writer, close to
Expressionism; died in Finland.

Andreyushkin, Pakhomi Ivanovich (1865-1887). Member of Narodnaya Volya terrorist group;
executed after attempt to assassinate Alexander III in 1887.

Antonov-Saratovsky, Vladimir Pavlovich (1884-1965). Old Bolshevik, served as judge in Shakhty
(1928) and Promparty (1930) trials.

Averbakh, I. L. Soviet jurist; associate of Vyshinsky.

Babushkin, Ivan Vasilyevich (1873-1906). Russian revolutionary.

Bakhtin, Mikhail Mikhailovich (1895-). Literary scholar, expert on Dostoyevsky. Unpublished in
Soviet Union from 1930 to 1963.

Bakunin, Mikha I Aleksandrovich (1814-1876). A founder of Anarchism.

Bandera, Stepan (1909-1959). Ukrainian nationalist; led anti-Soviet forces in Ukraine after World
War II until 1947; assassinated in Munich by a Soviet agent.

Bedny, Demyan (1883-1945). Soviet poet.

Belinsky, Vissarion Grigoryevich (1811-1848). Literary critic and ardent liberal, champion of
socially-conscious literature.

Benois, Aleksandr Nikolayevich (1870-1960). Scenic designer; emigrated 1926 to Paris.

Berdyayev, Nikolai Aleksandrovich (1874-1948). Philosopher, religious thinker; opposed atheism
and materialism. Expelled in 1922; lived in Paris after 1924.

Beria, Lavrenti Pavlovich (1899-1953). Georgian Bolshevik, became close Stalin associate in 1938,
in charge of secret police and national security. Executed after Stalin's death.

Biron or Biren. Russian name of Count Ernst Johann Biihren (1690 — 1772). A favorite of Empress
Anna Ivanovna, under whom he instituted a tyrannical rule. Blok, Aleksandr Aleksandrovich (1880-
1921). Symbolist poet.



Bliicher, Marshal Vasily Konstantinovich (1890-1938). Commander of Far East Military District,
1929-1938; shot in purge.

Blyumkin, Yakov Grigoryevich (1898-1929). A Left Socialist Revolutionary; assassinated German
Ambassador Mirbach in Moscow in 1918; later joined Cheka; executed after he took message from
Trotsky to Radek.

Boky, Gleb Ivanovich (1879-1941). Secret police official; member of Supreme Court after 1927;
arrested in 1937.

Bonch-Bruyevich, Vladimir Dmitriyevich (1873-1955). Bolshevik revolutionary; administrative
officer of Council of People's Commissars, 1917-1920.

Bondarin, Sergei Aleksandrovich (1903-). Children's writer.

Budenny, Marshal Semyon Mikhailovich (1883-1973). Civil War hero; commander of Bolshevik
cavalry; commander Southwest Front in early phase of World War n.

Bukharin, Nikolai Ivanovich (1888-1938). Prominent Party official and economic theorist; member
of Politburo after 1924 and general secretary of Comintern after 1926; expelled from Party in 1929;
executed after 1938 show trial.

Bulgakov, Mikhail Afanasyevich (1891-1940). Satirist, some of whose work has been published in
English.

Bulgakov, Sergei Nikolayevich (1871-1944). Religious philosopher; exiled in 1922, lived in Paris.

Bunin, Ivan Alekseyevich (1870-1953). Writer; emigrated 1920 to France; won Nobel Prize in 1933.

Bunyachenko, Sergei K. (7-1946). Commander of 1st Division of Vlasov's forces in World War II;
executed in Soviet Union in 1946.

Chamovsky, N. F. (1868-?). Soviet economic official; among defendants in 1930 Promparty trial.
Chekhovsky, Vladimir Moiseyevich (1877-?). Ukrainian nationalist.

Chernov, Viktor Mikhailovich (1873-1952). Socialist Revolutionary Party leader; emigrated in 1920.
Chubar, Vlas Yakovlevich (1891-1939). High Soviet Ukrainian official; shot in purges.
Chukovskaya, Lidiya Korneyevna (1907-). Soviet literary critic and writer (samizdat).
Dal (Dahl), Vladimir Ivanovich (1801-1872). Lexicographer.

Dan (Gurvich), Fyodor Ilyich (1871-1947). Menshevik leader, physician; exiled in 1922.

Denikin, Anton Ivanovich (1872-1947). Tsarist military leader; commanded anti-Bolshevik (White)
forces in south, 1918-1920; emigrated.

Derzhavm, Gavriil Romanovich (1743-1816). Poet and statesman under Catherine 11.

Dimitrov, Georgi Mikhailovich (1882-1949). Bulgarian Communist leader; chief defendant in 1933
Reichstag trial in Leipzig.



Dolgun, Alexander M. (Alexander D.) (1926-). American-born former employee of United States
Embassy in Moscow; spent eight years (1948-1956) in Soviet prisons and labor camps; allowed to
leave Soviet Union in 1971.

Donskoi, D. D. (1881-1936). Right SociaUst Revolutionary.

Doyarenko, Aleksei G. Soviet agronomist; a defendant in Working Peasants Party case of 1931.

Dukhonin, Nikolai Nikolayevich (1876-1917). Commander in Chief of Tsarist Army; slain by
soldiers.

Dyakov, Boris Aleksandrovich (1902-). Author of labor-camp mem- oirs.

Dzerzhinsky, Feliks Edmundovich (1877-1926). First chief of the secret police (Cheka-GPU-
OGPU); succeeded by Menzhinsky.

Ehrenburg, Ilya Grigoryevich (1891-1967). Soviet writer and journal- ist; spent many years in Paris;
author of memoirs of Stalin era.

Etinger, Y. G. (7-1952). Soviet physician, arrested in 1952 in so- called "doctors' case." Died under
interrogation.

Fedotov, A. A. (1864-?). A Soviet official; defendant in Shakhty trial.

Figner, Vera Nik^Jayevna (1852-1942). A leader of Narodnaya Volya group, took part in successful
conspiracy to assassinate Alexander II in 1881.

Filonenko, Maksimilian Maksimilianovich. Right Socialist Revolu- tionary; led anti-Bolshevik
forces in Archangel in 1918.

Frank, Semyon Lyudvigovich (1877-1950). Religious philosopher, pupil of Solovyev; exiled in
1922.

Fyodor Ivanovich (1557-1598). Halfwit son of Ivan the Terrible, whom he succeeded in 1584. His
regent was Boris Godunov, who reigned as Tsar, 1598-1605.

Gaaz, Fyodor Petrovich (Haas, Friedrich- Joseph) (1780-1853). Ger- man-born physician of Moscow
prison hospital; sought penal re- forms.

Gamarnik, Yan Borisovich (1894-1937). Soviet military leader who committed suicide during purge.

Garin, N. (Mikhailovsky, Nikolai Georgiyevicn) (1852-1906). Popular tum-of-the-century novelist,
author of a juvenile classic.

Gemet, Mikhail Nikolayevich (1874-?). Writer on the death pen- alty.

Ginzburg, Yevgeniya Semyonovna (191 1-). Author of labor-camp memoirs. Journey into the
Whirlwind.

Gippius, Zinaida Nikolayevna (1869-1945). Writer, wife of Merezh- kovsky; emigrated in 1920.

Golikov, Marshal Filipp Ivanovich (1900-). Soviet military leader; supervised repatriation of Red
Army prisoners from Germany.



Golyakov, Ivan Terentyevich. Presiding judge of Supreme Court under Stalin.

Gorky, Maxim (Peshkov, Aleksei Maksimovich) (1868-1936). Writer; disagreed with Lenin and
lived abroad (1921-1928); returned to Russia in 1931; died under mysterious circumstances.

Gots, Abram Rafailovich (1882-1940). A Right Socialist Revolu- tionary leader; a defendant in 1922
trial.

Govorov, Marshal Leonid Aleksandrovich (1897-1955). Soviet mil- itary leader.
Griboyedov, Aleksandr Sergeyevich (1795-1829). Playwright and diplomat.

Grigorenko, Pyotr Grigoryevich (1907 -). Former Red Army general, became a dissident in 1961; in
mental asylums since 1969.

Grigoryev, losif Fyodorovich (1890-1949). Prominent Soviet geol- ogist.

Grin (Grinovsky), Aleksandr Stepanovich (1880-1932). Writer of romantic, fantastic adventure
stories.

Grinevitsky, Ignati loakhimovich (1856-1881). Revolutionary, mem- ber of Narodnaya Volya group.
Threw bomb that killed Alexander II March 13, 1881; was himself mortally wounded.

Groman, Vladimir Gustavovich (1873-?). High Soviet economic of- ficial; a defendant in 1931 trial
of Mensheviks.

Gromyko, Andrei Andreyevich (1909-). Soviet diplomat; former ambassador to United States and
delegate to United Nations; For- eign Minister since 1957.

Gul (Goul), Roman Borisovich (1896-). Emigre writer of historical works; editor of Novy Zhumal, a
magazine published in New York.

Gumilyev, Nikolai Stepanovich (1886-1921). Acmeist poet, first hus- band of Akhmatova; accused
in anti-Soviet plot and executed.

Herzen, Aleksandr Ivanovich (1812-1870). Radical theorist.

Ilin, Ivan Aleksandrovich (1882-1954). Mystic philosopher, exiled in 1922.

Ivan Kalita (7-1340). Founder of Grand Duchy of Muscovy.

Ivanov-Razumnik (Ivanov, Razumnik Vasilyevich) (1876-1946). Left Socialist Revolutionary;
served in Tsarist prison (1901) and in Soviet labor camps; went to Germany in 1941.

Izgoyev (Lande), Aleksandr Solomonovich (1872-C.1938). A Right Cadet writer; expelled from
Soviet Union in 1922.

Izmailov, Nikolai Vasilyevich (1893-). Soviet literary scholar, editor of Pushkin's works.

Kaganovich, Lazar Moiseyevich (1893-). Close associate of Stalin, in charge of railroads. Ousted
from leadership in 1957.

Kalinin, Mikhail Ivanovich (1875-1946). Nominal President of Soviet Union (1919-1946), first as



Chairman of AU-Russian Central Executive Committee until 1922, then as Chairman of Central
Executive Committee of U.S.S.R., and after 1938 as Chairman of Presidium of Supreme Soviet.

Kamenev (Rosenfeld), Lev Borisovich (1883-1936). Prominent Bol- shevik leader, expelled from
Party in 1927, readmitted and re- expelled; executed after 1936 show trial.

Kaplan, Fanya (Dora) (1888-1918). A Left Socialist Revolutionary; executed after unsuccessful
attempt on Lenin's life in 1918.

Karakozov, Dmitri Vladimirovich (1840-1866). Revolutionary; exe- cuted after unsuccessful attempt
on life of Alexander 11 in 1866.

Karsavin, Lev Platonovich (1882-1952). Mystic philosopher; medieval- ist; exiled 1922; arrested in
Lithuania 1941; died hi Vorkuta camp.

Kasso, Lev Aristidovich (1865-1914). Reactionary Minister of Educa- tion under Nicholas IL

Katanyan, Ruben Pavlovich (1881-1966). Soviet state prosecuting official in 1920's and 1930's;
arrested 1938.

Kazakov, Ignati Nikolayevich (1891-1938). Physician accused of having murdered Soviet officials
through use of "lysates" (anti- bodies); shot after 1938 show trial.

Kerensky, Aleksandr Fyodorovich (1881-1970). A Socialist Revolu- tionary leader; headed
Provisional Government, July to November, 1917; fled to France; died in New York.

Khru stale V -No sar, Georgi Stepanovich (1877-1918). Elected Chair- man of St. Petersburg Soviet of
Workers' Deputies in 1905; opposed Bolsheviks in Ukraine in 1918; shot by Bolsheviks.

Kirov (Kostrikov), Sergei Mironovich (1886-1934). Close Stalin as- sociate; his murder in
Leningrad, reputedly inspired by Stalin, set off wave of mass reprisals.

Kishkin, Nikolai Mikhailovich (1864-1930). A leader of Constitu- tional Democratic Party; a
defendant in 1921 trial of famine-relief aides.

Kizevetter (Kiesewetter), Aleksandr Aleksandrovich (1866-1933). Cadet leader and historian;
expelled in 1922; lived in Prague.

Klyuchevsky, Vasily Osipovich (1841-1911). Prominent historian.

Klyuyev, Nikolai Alekseyevich (1887-1937). Peasant poet; glorified ancient Russian values,
opposing Western cultural influences; exiled to Siberia in early 1930's.

Kolchak, Aleksandr Vasilyevich (1873-1920). Tsarist admiral; led anti-Bolshevik forces in Siberia,
1918-1920; executed.

Koltsov, Nikolai Konstantinovich (1872-1940). Prominent biologist; founded experimental school in
Russian biology.

Kondratyev, Nikolai Dmitriyevich (1892-?). Agricultural economist; figure in Working Peasants
Party case in 1931.

Komilov, Lavr Georgiyevich (1870-1918). Commander in Chief of Russian forces under Provisional



Government; led revolt against Kerensky in August, 1917; fought Bolsheviks in Don area; killed in
battle.

Korolenko, Vladimir Galaktionovich (1853-1921). Peasant demo- cratic writer; persecuted under
Tsars; viewed as bourgeois by Bol- sheviks.

Kosarev, Aleksandr Vasilyevich (1903-1939). Leader of the Komso- mol, 1929-1938.

Kosior, Stanislav Vikentyevich (1889-1939). Ukrainian Bolshevik leader; shot in purges.

Kozyrev, Nikolai Aleksandrovich (1908-). Astronomer; in prison, 1937-1948.

Krasikov, Pyotr Ananyevich (1870-1939). Old Bolshevik; prosecuting and justice official in 1920's
and 1930's.

Krasnov (Levitin), Anatoly Emanuilovich (19 15-). Religious writer; imprisoned under Stalin; in
dissident movement after 1960.

Krasnov, Pyotr Nikolayevich (1869-1947). Don Cossack leader; emi- grated in 1919; led pro-
German Russian units in World War II; handed over by Allies after war and executed in Soviet
Union.

Krestinsky, Nikolai Nikolayevich (1883-1938). Bolshevik Party of- ficial and diplomat; shot after
1938 show trial.

Kruglov, Sergei Nikiforovich (1903-). Minister of Interior, 1946- 1956.

Krylenko, Nikolai Vasilyevich (1885-1938). Chief state prosecutor, 1918-1931; later People's
Commissar of Justice; shot in 1938.

Krylov, Ivan Andreyevich (1769-1844). Noted fabuUst.

Kuibyshev, Valerian Vladimirovich (1888-1935). Prominent eco- nomic planning official; died
under mysterious circumstances.

Kupriyanov, G. N. Karelian Party official; arrested in 1949.

Kursky, Dmitri Ivanovich (1874-1932). People's Commissar of Justice, 1918-1928; envoy to Italy,
1928-1932.

Kuskova, Yekaterina Dmitriyevna (1869-1958). Cadet, later SR; figure in Famine Relief case 1921;
exiled in 1922.

Kuznetsov, Aleksei Aleksandrovich (1905-1950). Lieutenant general, one of the organizers of the
defense of Leningrad, Secretary of the Central Committee, convicted in connection with the
Leningrad Affair.

Kuznetsov, Col. Gen. Vasily Ivanovich (1894-1964). Soviet military leader in World War II.
Lapshin, Ivan Ivanovich (1870-1948). Philosopher; exiled in 1922 to Prague, where he died.
Larichev, Viktor A. (1887-?). Chairman, Main Fuels Committee; figure in Promparty trial in 1930.



Larin, Y. (Lurye, Mikhail Aleksandrovich) (1882-1932). Agricultural economist; former Menshevik;
helped found Soviet planning system.

Latsis (Lacis), Martyn Ivanovich (Sudrabs, Yan Fridrikhovich) (1888- 1941). Early Cheka official,
1917-1921; director, Plekhanov Eco- nomics Institute, 1932-1937; arrested 1937.

Lelyushenko, Dmitri Danilovich (1901-). Soviet World War II leader.

Lermontov, Mikhail Yuryevich (1814-1841). Romantic poet.

Levina, Revekka Saulovna (1899-1964). Soviet economist.

Levitan, Yuri Borisovich (1914-). Soviet radio announcer noted for his sonorous voice, which
became familiar through announcement of major Soviet successes in World War 11 and other news
events.

Levitin. See Krasnov, A. E. Likhachev, Nikolai Petrovich (1862-1935). Historian, specialist on ikon
painting.

Lomonosov, Mikhail Vasilyevich (1711-1765). Universal scholar; in Russian spiritual history,
prototype of scientific genius arising from the people.

Lordkipanidze, G. S. (1881-1937). Georgian writer; died in purge.

Loris-Melikov, Mikhail Tarpelovich (1825-1888). Powerful Tsarist Interior Minister, 1880-1881;
initiator of unimplemented reforms.

Lorkh, Aleksandr Georgiyevich (1889-). Prominent potato breeder.
Lossky, Nikolai Onufriyevich (1870-1965). Philosopher; exiled in 1922.

Lozovsky, A. (Dridzo, Solomon Abramovich) (1878-1952). Revolu- tionary; chief of Trade Union
International, 1921-1937; Deputy People's Commissar for Foreign Affairs and head of
Sovinformburo in World War II; shot in anti-Jewish purge.

Lunacharsky, Anatoly Vasilyevich (1875-1932). Marxist cultural theorist; People's Commissar for
Education, 1917-1929.

Lunin, Mikhail Sergeyevich (1787-1845). One of the Decembrists; wrote philosophical and political
tracts in Siberian exile.

Lysenko, Trofim Denisovich (1898-). Agricultural biologist; virtual dictator of Soviet science after
1940 under Stalin, and of biology in the Khrushchev era until 1964.

Maisky, Ivan Mikhailovich (1884-). Historian and diplomat; former Menshevik; envoy to Britain,
1932-1943; Deputy Foreign Commis- sar, 1943-1946.

Makarenko, Anton Semyonovich (1888-1939). Educator; organized rehabilitation colonies for
juvenile delinquents.

Malinovsky, Roman Vatslavovich (1876-1918). Tsarist police in- former planted among Bolsheviks;
emigrated in 1914; returned to Russia voluntarily in 1918, when he was tried and executed.



Mandelstam, Osip Emilyevich (1891-1938). Acmeist poet; died in transit camp.
Mariya, Mother. See Skobtsova.

Markos, Gen. Vafiades (1906-). Greek leftist rebel leader, 1947- 1948.

Martov (Tsederbaum), Yuli Osipovich (1873-1923). A Menshevik leader; exiled by Lenin in 1921.

Mayakovsky, Vladimir Vladimirovich (1893-1930). Futurist poet; suicide.

Meek, Nikolai Karlovich von (1863-1929). Tsarist railroad industrial- ist; worked for Bolsheviks
after 1917; accused of counterrevolu- tionary activities and shot.

Melgunov, Sergei Petrovich (1879-1956). Historian and Popular Socialist leader; exiled in 1923;
lived in Paris.

Menshikov, Aleksandr Danilovich (1673-1729). Military leader and statesman; favorite of Peter the
Great and Catherine I.

Menzhinsky, Vyacheslav Rudolfovich (1874-1934). Secret police of- ficial; headed OGPU, 1926-
1934.

Meretskov, Marshal Kirill Afanasyevich (1897-1968). World War II leader.

Merezhkovsky, Dmitri Sergey evich (1865-1941). Philosopher and novelist; founder of Symbolist
movement; emigrated 1919 to Paris.

Mikhailov, Nikolai Aleksandrovich (1906-). Chief of Komsomol, 1938-1952; later envoy to Poland
and Indonesia, Minister of Cul- ture, chairman of State Publishing Committee; retired 1970.

Mikolajczyk, Stanislaw (1901-1966). Polish Peasant Party leader; in Polish government in exile
during World War 11; in Polish postwar government, 1945-1947.

Mikoyan, Anastas Ivanovich (1895-). Close associate of Stalin; in charge of consumer-goods area;
foreign policy adviser to Khru- shchev; retired 1966.

Milyukov, Pavel Nikolayevich (1859-1943). Leader of Constitutional Democratic Party and
historian; emigrated in 1920; died in U.S.A.

Mirovich, Vasily Yakovlevich (1740-1764). Attempted palace coup under Catherine II in favor of
pretender Ivan IV Antonovich.

Molotov (Skryabin), Vyacheslav Mikhailovich (1890-). Close associ- ate of Stalin; served as Premier
and Foreign Minister; ousted by Khrushchev after so-called 1957 anti-Party coup; retired.

Monomakh. See Vladimir II.

Myakotin, Venedikt Aleksandrovich (1867-1937). Historian and a founder of Popular Socialist
Party; exiled in 1922.

Nabokov (Sirin), Vladimir (1899-). Russian- American writer; son of F. D. Nabokov, a Cadet leader,
who emigrated in 1919.



Narokov (Marchenko), Nikolai Vladimirovich (1887-1969). Emigre writer; left Soviet Union in
World War II; lived in Monterey, Calif.

Natanson, Mark Andreyevich (1850-1919). Populist, later a Socialist Revolutionary; sided with
Bolsheviks during World War I; died in Switzerland.

Nekrasov, Nikolai Alekseyevich (1821-1878). Civic poet.

Novikov, Nikolai Ivanovich (1744-1818). Writer and social critic; incarcerated in Schlusselburg
Fortress under Catherine II. Novorussky, Mikhail Vasilyevich (1861-1925). Revolutionary, con-
victed with Aleksandr Ulyanov after abortive attempt to assassinate Alexander III in 1887; death
sentence commuted to imprisonment in Schliisselburg.

Obolensky, Yevgeny Petrovich (1796-1865). One of the Decembrists; death sentence commuted to
20 years' Siberian exile.

Olitskaya, Yekaterina Lvovna (1898-). Soviet dissident writer whose prison-camp memoirs
circulated in samizdat and were published in 1971 by Posse v, Russian-language publishing house of
Frankfurt, West Germany.

Olminsky (Aleksandrov), Mikhail Stepanovich (1863-1933). Early professional revolutionary,
journalist.

Ordzhonikidze, Grigory (Sergo) Konstantinovich (1886-1937). Close associate of Stalin, charged
with heavy industry; a suicide during purges.

Osorgin (Ilin), Mikhail Andreyevich (1878-1942). Writer; exiled in 1922.

Palchinsky, Pyotr Akimovich (1878-1929). Economist and mining engineer; chief defendant in
Shakhty trial of 1928; shot.

Pasternak, Boris Leonidovich (1890-1960). Poet and novelist; 1958 Nobel laureate.

Perkhurov, Aleksandr Petrovich (1876-1922). Anti-Bolshevik mill- tary commander; shot in
Yaroslavl in 1922. Peshekhonov, Aleksei Vasilyevich (1867-1933). Writer; exiled in 1922.

Peshkova-Vinaver, Yekaterina Pavlovna (1876-1965). First wife of Maxim Gorky; headed Political
Red Cross.

Pestel, Pavel Ivanovich (1793-1826). One of the Decembrists, leader of radical wing; hanged.

Peters, Yakov Khristoforovich (1886-1942). Latvian revolutionary; high secret police official in
1920's; Uquidated.

Petlyura, Simon Vasilyevich (1879-1926). Ukrainian nationalist leader; headed anti-Bolshevik forces
in Ukraine, 1918-1919; assas- sinated in Paris exile.

Pilnyak (Vogau), Boris Andreyevich (1894-1937). Soviet writer; ac- cused of distorting
revolutionary events; died in prison.

Platonov, Sergei Fyodorovich (1860-1933). Historian; in official dis- favor in early 1930's.
Plekhanov, Georgi Valentino vich (1856-1918). Marxist philosopher and historian, became a



Menshevik leader; opposed Bolsheviks' 1917 coup.

Pletnev, Dmitri Dmitriyevich (1872-1953). Physician; sentenced to 25 years after 1938 show trial.

Pobedonostsev, Konstantin Petrovich (1827-1907). Lawyer and poli- tician; Procurator of the Holy
Synod; his reactionary Russian na- tionalist views were influential under Alexander III and in the
early reign of Nicholas II.

Postyshev, Pavel Petrovich (1887-1940). Ukrainian Bolshevik leader; arrested in 1938; died in
prison.

Potemkin, Grigory Aleksandrovich (1739-1791). Military leader and favorite of Catherine the Great.

Prokopovich, Sergei Nikolayevich (1871-1955). Economist and a Cadet leader; figure in 1921
Famine Relief Commission trial; ex- pelled 1922.

Ptukhin, Lieut. Gen. Yevgeny Savvich (1900-1941). Soviet Air Force commander; executed after
German attack against Soviet Union.

Pugachev, Yemelyan Ivanovich (1742-1775). Leader of a major peasant revolt against Catherine II;
executed.

Radek, Karl Bemgardovich (1885-1939). Comintern official, later journalist; shot after 1937 show
trial.

Radishchev, Aleksandr Nikolayevich (1749-1802). Writer and social critic; exiled to Siberia by
Catherine II.

Rakovsky, Khristian Georgiyevich (1873-1941). Bolshevik official who served as Ukrainian
Premier, 1919-1923, and diplomat, 1923- 1927; imprisoned after 1938 show trial; daughter Yelena
arrested 1948.

Ramzin, Leonid Konstantinovich (1887-1948). Heat engineer; princi- pal defendant in 1930
Promparty trial; death sentence commuted to 10 years; professionally active again during World War
II.

Ransome, Arthur (1884-1967). British journalist; wrote on Bolshevik Revolution.

Raskolnikov (Ilin), Fyodor Fyodorovich (1892-1939). Bolshevik diplomat; defected in France; died
under mysterious circumstances.

Rasputin, Grigory Yefimovich (1872-1916). Adventurer with strong influence over family of
Nicholas II; killed by courtiers.

Razin, Stepan Timofeyevich (Stenka) (16307-1671). Leader of a Cossack and peasant rebellion in
the middle and lower Volga ter- ritories, he was defeated and executed; legendary figure in Russian
national poetry.

Reilly, Sidney George (1874-1925). British intelligence officer; killed while crossing Soviet-Finnish
border.

Repin, Ilya Yefimovich (1844-1930). Prominent painter; one of his works depicts the Volga
boatmen.



Rokossovsky, Marshal Konstantin Konstantinovich (1896-1968). Soviet World War II leader;
Defense Minister in Poland, 1949- 1956.

Romanov, Panteleimon Sergeyevkh (1884-1938). Soviet satirist.

Rudzutak, Yan Ernestovich (1887-1938). Associate of Stalin; arrested 1937; died in prison.

Ryabushinsky, Pavel Pavlovich (1871-1924). Russian industrialist and anti-Bolshevik leader;
mentioned in 1930 Promparty trial.

Rykov, Aleksei Ivanovich (1881-1938). Close associate of Stalin; Premier of Sovie^Union, 1924-
1930; shot after 1938 show trial.

Ryleyev, Kondrati Fyodorovich (1795-1826). A Decembrist; hanged.

Rysakov, Nikolai Ivanovich (1861-1881). A revolutionary of Narod- naya Volya group; executed
after assassination of Alexander n in 1881.

Ryumin, M. D. (7-1953). Secret police official who engineered the "doctors' case"; executed 1953.

Ryurik. Legendary Varangian prince who came to Novgorod in mid- ninth century and founded first
Russian dynasty.

Sakharov, Col. Igor K. Emigre who commanded pro-German Russian military unit in World War

n.

Saltychikha (Saltykova, Darya Nikolayevna) (1730-1801). Woman landowner in Moscow Province;
noted for cruel treatment of serfs.

Samsonov, Aleksandr Vasilyevich (1859-1914). Tsarist general; sui- cide after his forces were
defeated in East Prussia in World War I.

Savinkov, Boris Viktorovich (1879-1925). A Socialist Revolutionary leader; arrested after he re-
entered Russia illegally in 1924.

Sawa (1327-1406). Russian Orthodox saint; pupil of Sergius of Radonezh.
Sedin, Ivan K. People's Commissar for Petroleum in World War II.
Selivanov, Dmitri Fyodorovich (1885-?). Mathematician; emigrated 1922.
Serebryakova, Galina losifovna (1905-). Writer; author of camp memoirs.

Sergius of Radonezh (1321-1391). Russian Orthodox saint; founded monasteries, including Trinity-
St. Sergius at Zagorsk, near his home town, Radonezh.

Serov, Ivan Aleksandrovich (1905-). Secret police official; chairman of KGB, 1954-1958.

Shalamov, Varlam Tikhonovich (1907 -). Writer; spent 17 years in Kolyma camps; author of Kolyma
Stories (Paris, 1969).

Shchastny, Captain Aleksei Mikhailovich (7-1918). Commander of Red Baltic Fleet; executed.



Shcherbakov, Alekandr Sergeyevich (1901-1945). Close associate of Stalin; Moscow city secretary,
1938-1945; Chief of Red Army's Political Department, 1942-1945.

Sheinin, Lev Romanovich (1906-1967). Soviet prosecuting and in- vestigatory official; wrote spy
stories after 1950.

Sheshkovsky, Stepan Ivanovich (1727-1793). Judicial investigator under Catherine 11; known for
harsh interrogatory techniques.

Shmidt, Pyoto Petrovich (1867-1906). Lieutenant in Black Sea Fleet; executed after Sevastopol
revolt.

Sholokhov, Mikhail Aleksandrovich (1905-). Soviet writer; 1965 Nobel laureate.

Shulgin, Vasily Vitalyevich (1878-1965). Monarchist; emigrated after 1917 Revolution; caught by
Red Army in Yugoslavia at end of World War II; served 10 years in labor camp.

Shvernik, Nikolai Mikhailovich (1888-1970). Associate of Stalin; trade-union chief, 1930-1944 and
1953-1956; President of Soviet Union, 1946-1953.

Sikorski, Wladyslaw (1881-1943). Military leader of Polish exiles.

Skobtsova, Yelizaveta Yuryevna (1892-1945). Acmeist poet; emi- grated to Paris, where she became
a nun (Mother Mariya); died in Nazi camp.

Skrypnik, Nikolai Alekseyevich (1872-1933). Ukrainian People's Commissar for Justice (1922-
1927) and Education (1927-1933); suicide.

Skuratov, Malyuta (Belsky, Grigory Lukyanovich) (7-1572). Trusted aide of Ivan the Terrible;
personifies Ivan's cruelties; headed Oprichnina, a policelike organization.

Smimov, Ivan Nikitovich (1881-1936). Soviet People's Commissar for Communications, 1923-1927;
expelled from Party; shot after 1936 trial.

Smushkevich, Yakov Yladimirovich (1902-1941). Soviet Air Force commander; executed after
German invasion.

Sokolnikov, Grigory Yakovlevich (1888-1939). Soviet People's Com- missar of Finance, 1922-1926;
envoy to Britain, 1929-1934; sen- tenced to 10 years after 1937 show trial; died in prison.

Solovyev, Vladimir Sergeyevich (1853-1900). Religious philosopher; sought synthesis of Russian
Orthodox faith and Western scientific thought and Roman Catholicism.

Stalin, losif Vissarionovich (1879-1953). Soviet political leader; named General Secretary of the
Communist Party in 1922. After Lenin's death in 1924, he gradually eliminated political rivals in
series of purges culminating in great trials of 1936 — 1938. His original family name was
Dzhugashvili; revolutionary party name was Koba.

Stanislavsky, Konstantin Sergeyevich (1863-1938). Stage director; co- founder of the Moscow Art
Theater in 1898; known in the West for the "Stanislavsky method" of acting technique.

Stepun, Fyodor Augustovich (1884-1965). Philosopher; expelled in 1922.



Stolypin, Pyotr Arkadyevich (1862-191 1). Tsarist statesman; served as Minister of Interior after
1906; known for agrarian reform re- settling poor peasants in Siberia; slain by an SR.

Sudrabs. See Latsis.

Sukhanov (Gimmer), Nikolai Nikolayevich (1882-1940). Menshevik historian; meeting at his
apartment in Petrograd in October, 1917, the Bolsheviks decided to launch an armed uprising; figure
in 1931 Menshevik trial; released after hunger strike; rearrested in purges of late 1930's; author of
detailed account of the Bolshevik Revolu- tion.

Surikov, Vasily Ivanovich (1848-1916). Historical painter of the realist school.

Suvorov, Aleksandr Vasilyevich (1729-1800). Military leader; led Italian and Swiss campaigns
against Napoleon.

Svechin, Aleksandr Andreyevich (1878-1935). Military historian; shot.
Sverdlov, Yakov Mikhailovich (1885-1919). First Soviet President.
Tagantsev, Nikolai Stepanovich (1843-1923). Writer on criminal law.

Tarle, Yevgeny Viktorovich (1875-1955). Soviet historian; was briefly in official disfavor in early
1930's.

Tikhon, Patriarch (1865-1925). Head of Russian Orthodox Church after 1917; detained 1922-1923
on oppositionist charges.

Timofeyev-Ressovsky, Nikolai Vladimirovich (1900-). Soviet radio- biologist; worked in Germany,
1924-1945; spent 10 years in Stalin camps after return to Soviet Union.

Tolstoi, Aleksei Nikolayevich (1883-1945). Soviet writer; was mem- ber of 1937 Supreme Soviet
(national legislature).

Tolstoi, Alexandra Lvovna (1884-). Youngest daughter of Lev Tol- stoi; author of a biography of her
father; lives in the U.S., where she founded the Tolstoi Foundation for aid to refugees.

Tomsky, Mikhail Pavlovich (1880-1936). First Soviet chief of trade unions, until 1929; suicide in
Stalin purges.

Trotsky (Bronshtein), Lev (Leon) Davidovich (1879-1940). Associate of Lenin; first Soviet Defense
Commissar, until 1925; expelled from Party in 1927; deported to Turkey in 1929; slain in Mexico
City by a Soviet agent.

Trubetskoi, Sergei Petrovich (1790-1860). One of the Decembrists; death sentence commuted to
exile; amnestied in 1856.

Tsvetayeva, Marina Ivanovna (1892-1941). Poet; lived abroad 1922 to 1939; a suicide two years
after return to Soviet Union.

Tukhachevsky, Mikhail Nikolayevich (1893-1937). Soviet military leader; shot in 1937 on trumped-
up treason charges.

Tur Brothers. Pen names of two playwrights and authors of spy stories: Leonid Davydovich



Tubelsky (1905-1961) and Pyotr Lvovich Ryzhei (1908-).

Tynyanov, Yuri Nikolayevich (1895-1943). Soviet writer and literary scholar.

Ulrikh, Vasily Vasilyevich (1889-1951). Supreme Court justice; pre- sided over major trials of
1920's and 1930's.

Ulyanov, Aleksandr Ilyich (1866-1887). Lenin's older brother; exe- cuted after unsuccessful attempt
to assassinate Alexander in in 1887.

Ulyanova (Yelizarova-Ulyanova), Anna llyinichna (1874-1935). Lenin's sister; journalist and editor.

Uritsky, Moisei Solomonovich (1873-1918). Revolutionary; chairman of the Petrograd Cheka; his
assassination by an SR set off Red Terror.

Utyosov, Leonid Osipovich (1895-). Soviet orchestra leader and variety-stage star.

Valentinov (Volsky), Nikolai Vladislavovich (1879-1964). Journalist and philosopher; former
Bolshevik turned Menshevik; emigrated 1930.

Vasilyev-Yuzhin, Mikhail Ivanovich (1876-1937). Revolutionary; secret police and justice official.

Vavilov, Nikolai Ivanovich (1887-1943). Prominent plant geneticist; Director of Institute of Applied
Botany (1924-1940) and Institute of Genetics (1930-1940); arrested 1940; died in imprisonment.

Vereshchagin, Vasily Vasilyevich (1842-1904). Painter noted for battle scenes.

Vladimir 11 Monomakh. Ruler of Kievan Russia, 1113-1 125.

Vladimirov (Sheinfinkel), Miron Konstantinovich (1879-1925). Early Soviet official in agriculture,
finance and economic management.

Vlasov, Lieut. Gen. Andrei Andreyevich (1900-1946). Red Army officer; captured by Germans in
1942; led Russian forces against Soviet Union; handed over by Allies after war and executed.

Voikov, Pyotr Lazarevich (1888-1927). Bolshevik revolutionary; Soviet representative in Warsaw,
1924-1927; assassinated by an emigre.

Voloshin, Maksimilian Aleksandrovich (1878-1932). Symbolist poet and watercolorist.

Voroshilov, Kliment Yefremovich (1881-1969). Close associate of Stalin; long Defense Commissar;
Soviet President, 1953-1960.

Vysheslavtsev, Boris Petrovich (1877-1954). Philosopher; exiled in 1922.

Vyshinsky, Andrei Yanuaryevich (1883-1954). Lawyer and diplomat; former Menshevik turned
Bolshevik; chief state prosecutor in show trials, 1936-1938; Deputy Foreign Commissar and
Minister, 1939- 1949 and 1953-1954; Foreign Minister, 1949-1953.

Wrangel, Pyotr Nikolayevich (1878-1928). Tsarist military com- mander; led anti-Bolshevik forces
in South in 1920 after Denikin.

Yagoda, Genrikh Grigoryevich (1891-1938). Secret police official; People's Commissar of Internal



Affairs, 1934-1936; shot after 1938 show trial.

Yakubovich, Pyotr Filippovich (1860-191 1). Poet; translated Baude- laire; wrote memoirs about his
Tsarist exile.

Yaroshenko, Nikolai Aleksandrovich (1846-1898). Painter.

Yenukidze, Avel Safronovich (1877-1937). Bolshevik official; Secre- tary of Central Executive
Committee, 1918-1935; shot in purges.

Yennilov, Vladimir Yladimirovich (1904-1965). Soviet literary critic.
Yesenin, Sergei Aleksandrovich (1895-1925). Imagist poet; suicide.

Yezhov, Nikolai Ivanovich (1895-1939). Secret police official; People's Commissar of Internal
Affairs, 1936-1938.

Yudenich, Nikolai Nikolayevich (1862-1933). Tsarist military com- mander; led anti-Bolshevik
forces in Estonia, 1918-1920.

Zalygin, Sergei Pavlovich (1913-). Soviet writer.

Zamyatin, Yevgeny Ivanovich (1884-1937). Writer; returned 1917 from abroad, but opposed
Bolsheviks; emigrated in 1932; his novel We, published in London in 1924, influenced Huxley,
Orwell.

Zasulich, Vera Ivanovna (1849-1919). Revolutionary; acquitted after attempt to assassinate Mayor of
St. Petersburg; emigrated 1880; returned 1905; became Menshevik.

Zavalishin, Dmitri Irinarkhovich (1804-1892). One of the Decem- brists; sentenced to 20 years'
Siberian exile; worked as journalist after 1863.

Zhdanov, Andrei Aleksandrovich (1896-1948). Close associate of Stalin; shaped cultural policy after
World Warn.

Zhebrak, Anton Romanovich (1901-1965). Soviet geneticist.

Zhelyabov, Andrei Ivanovich (1851-1881). Revolutionary; executed after his assassination of
Alexander n in 1881.

Zhukov, Marshal Georgi Konstantinovkh (1896-). World War II leader.

Zinoviev (Apfelbaum), Grigory Yevseyevich (1883-1936). Associate of Lenin; expelled from Party
in 1927; shot after 1936 show trial.

INSTITUTIONS AND TERMS

All-Russian Central Executive Committee. See VTsIK.

April Theses. A programmatic statement issued by Lenin in April, 1917, calling for end of war with
Germany and transfer of power to the Soviets.

Basmachi. Name given to anti-Bolshevik forces in Central Asia after 1917 Revolution.



Black Hundreds. Armed reactionary groups in Tsarist Russia; active from about 1905 to 1917 in
pogroms of Jews and political assassinations of liberal personalities.

Butyrki. A major Moscow prison, named for a district of Moscow; often known also as Butyrka.
Cadet. See Constitutional Democratic Party.

Chechen. Ethnic group of Northern Caucasus; exiled by Stalin in 1944 on charges of collaboration
with German forces.

Cheka. Original name of the Soviet secret police, 1917-1922; succeeded by GPU.

Chinese Eastern Railroad. A Manchurian rail system built (1897-1903) as part of original Trans-
Siberian Railroad. Jointly operated by Chinese and Soviet authorities until 1935 (when it was sold to
Japanese-dominated Manchukuo government) and again in 1945-1950. Russian acronym: KVZhD.

Codes. The 1926 Criminal Code and the 1923 Code of Criminal Procedure were repealed in 1958

with the adoption of new Fundamental Principles of Criminal Legislation and Criminal Procedure; in
1960 these were embodied in a new Criminal Code and a new Code of Criminal Procedure.

Collegium. Governing board of Soviet government departments and other institutions.

Comintern. Acronym for Communist International, the world organization of Communist parties
that existed from 1919 to 1943.

Committee of the Poor, also known by the Russian acronym Kombed. A Bolshevik-dominated
organization of poor peasants (1918).

Constituent Assembly. A multiparty legislative body with large anti-Bolshevik majority, elected in
November, 1917, after the Bolshevik Revolution. It met in January, 1918, but was broken up when it
refused to adopt Bolshevik proposals.

Constitutional Democratic Party. Founded in 1905 under the Tsars, advocating a constitutional
monarchy; played a conservative role after overthrow of Tsar; members were known as Cadets, from
a Russian acronym for the party.

Council of People's Commissars. Name given the Soviet cabinet (government) before 1946, when
it became the Council of Ministers; also known by Russian acronym Sovnarkom.

Crimean Tatars. Exiled by Stalin to Central Asia in 1944 on charges of collaboration with
Germans.

Dashnak. Anti-Bolshevik group in Armenia after 1917 Revolution.

Decembrists. Russian officers and intellectuals who took part in un-successful liberal uprising
against Nicholas I in December, 1825.

Doctors' case. The arrest of leading Kremlin physicians, most of them Jews, in 1952 on trumped-up
charges of plotting against the lives of Soviet leaders. At least one, Y. G. Etinger, is believed to have
died under interrogation; the others were released after Stalin's death in 1953.

Famine Relief, State Commission for. A Soviet governmental body, set up in 1921-1922; also
known by the Russian acronym Pomgol.



GPU. Designation for Soviet secret police in 1922; acronym for Russian words meaning State
Political Administration; continued to be used popularly after 1922, when the official designation
became OGPU, acronym for United State Political Administration.

Gulag. The Soviet penal system under Stalin; a Russian acronym for Chief Administration of
Corrective Labor Camps.

Hehalutz. Zionist movement that prepared young Jews for settling in Holy Land; it founded most of
the kibbutzim.

Hiwi. German designation for Russian volunteers in German armed forces during World War II;
acronym for Hilfswillige.

Industrial Academy. A Moscow school that served as training ground of industrial managers in late
1920's and early 1930's.

Industrial Party. See Promparty.

Informburo. See Sovinformburo.

Ingush. Ethnic group of Northern Caucasus; exiled by Stalin in 1944 on charges of collaboration
with Germans.

Isolator. (1) Type of political prison established in early stage of Soviet regime for fractious
Bolsheviks and other political foes. (2) In a labor camp, the designation for a building with
punishment cells.

Kalmyks. Ethnic group of Northern Caucasus; exiled by Stalin in 1943 on charges of collaboration
with German forces.

KGB. Acronym for Soviet secret police after 1953; stands for State Security Committee.

Khalkhin-Gol. River on border between China and Mongolia. Scene of Soviet- Japanese military
clashes in 1939.

Khasan. Lake on Soviet-Chinese border, near Sea of Japan. Scene of Soviet- Japanese military clash
in 1938.

Kolyma. Region of northeast Siberia; center of labor camps under Stalin.
Komsomol. Russian acronym for Young Communist League.
KVZhD. See Chinese Eastern Railroad.
Labor day. Accounting unit on collective farms.

Lubyanka. Popular designation for secret police headquarters and prison in central Moscow, named
for adjacent street and square (now Dzerzhinsky Street and Square); housed Rossiya Insurance
Company before the 1917 Revolution.

Makhorka. A coarse tobacco (Nicotiana rustica) grown mainly in the Ukraine.
Mensheviks. Democratic faction of Marxist socialists; split in 1903 from Bolshevik majority;



repressed after 1917 Bolshevik Revolution.

MGB. Initials for Soviet secret police, 1946-1953; acronym for Ministry of State Security;
succeeded by KGB.

MVD. Russian acronym for Ministry of Interior; performed secret police function briefly in 1953.

Narodnaya Volya (literal translation: People's Will). Secret terrorist society dedicated to
overthrowing Tsarism; existed from 1879 until disbanded in 1881 after assassination of Alexander II.

Narodnik (Populist). Member of populist revolutionary movement under the Tsars.

NEP. Acronym for New Economic Policy, a period of limited private enterprise, 1921-1928.

Nine grams. A bullet.

NKGB. Designation of Soviet secret police, 1943-1946; acronym for People's Commissariat of State
Security.

NKVD. Designation of Soviet secret police, 1934-1943; acronym for People's Commissariat of
Internal Affairs.

OGPU. Designation of Soviet secret police, 1922-1934; acronym for United State Political
Administration.

Okhrana. Name of Tsarist secret police from 1881 to 1917; Russian word means "protection,"
replacing the full designation Department for the Protection of Public Security and Order.

OSO. See Special Board.

People's Commissariat. Name of Soviet government departments from 1917 to 1946, when they
were renamed "Ministry."

Petrograd. Official name of Leningrad, 1914 — 1924.

Polizei. German word for "police"; designation of Russians who served as police under German
occupation in World War II.

Pomgol. See Famine Relief.

Popular Socialist Party. Founded in 1906, it favored general demo- cratic reforms, opposed
terrorism.

Promparty. Mixed Russian-English acronym for Industrial Party (in Russian, Promyshlennaya
Partiya). Nonexistent underground to which the organization of industrial managers tried in 1930
allegedly belonged.

Provisional Government. Coalition government of Russia after over- throw of Tsarism, March to
November, 1917; first under Prince Georgi Lvov, later under Kerensky; overthrown by Bolsheviks.

Revolutionary Tribunal (Revtribunal). Special Soviet courts (1917- 1922), which tried
counterrevolutionary cases.



Russkaya Pravda. Political program of the Decembrists; drafted by Pestel; the Russian words mean
"Russian truth."

Sapropelite Committee. A scientific study group that sought to use bituminous lake-bottom ooze,
or sapropel, as a fuel around 1920.

Schlusselburg. Fortress on Lake Ladoga, at outlet of Neva River; used as political prison under
Tsars; now called Petrokrepost.

Schutzbund. Armed contingents of Austrian Social Democrats; members sought refuge in Soviet
Union in 1934 after defeat in civil war.

Sharashka. Russian prison slang for a special research center in which the research scientists,
specialists, and technicians are all prisoners under prison discipline.

Short Course. Familiar title of the standard Stalinist version of the history of the Soviet Communist
Party; used as the official text from 1938 until after Stalin's death in 1953.

SMERSH. Acronym for Soviet counterintelligence during World War II; stands for "death to spies."

Smolny. Former girls' school; Communist Party headquarters in Leningrad.

Socialist Revolutionary Party. Created in 1890's out of several populist groups; split at first
congress held in Finland in December, 1905, into right wing, opposed to terrorism, and left wing,
favoring terrorism; SR's played key role in Provisional Government; left wing cooperated briefly
with Bolsheviks after Revolution.

Solovetsky Islands (colloquially known as Solovki). Island group in White Sea, with monasteries;
used as place of exile for rebellious priests in Middle Ages; early forced-labor camp (SLON) after
1917 Revolution.

Sovinformburo. Soviet information agency in World War II.
Sovnarkom. See Council of People's Commissars.

Special Board (Russian acronym: OSO). Three-man boards of People's Commissariat of Internal
Affairs, with powers to sentence "socially dangerous" persons without trial; abolished in 1953.

SR. See Socialist Revolutionary Party.

Stolypin car. A railroad car used to transport prisoners, named for P. A. Stolypin; also known in
prison slang as vagonzak, for vagon zaklyuchennykh (prisoner car).

Supreme Council of the Economy. Highest industrial management agency in early years of Soviet
regime; established in 1917; abolished 1932, when it was divided into industrial ministries.

Supreme Soviet. The national legislature of the Soviet Union, with counterparts in its constituent
republics; meets usually twice a year to approve decisions taken by the Soviet leadership. Its
lawmaking function is performed between sessions by the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet;
nominally the highest state body in the Soviet Union.

Time of Troubles. A period of hardship and confusion during the Polish and Swedish invasions of
Russia in the early seventeenth century.



Union Bureau. See Mensheviks.

UPK. Code of Criminal Procedure. See Codes.

Verkhtrib. Russian acronym for Supreme Tribunal (1918-1922), which tried the most important
cases in the early Soviet period.

Vikzhel. Railroad workers union, opposed Bolsheviks after 1917 Revolution; acronym stands for
All-Russian Executive Committee of Railroad Workers Union.

VSNKh. See Supreme Council of the Economy.

VTsIK. Acronym for All-Russian Central Executive Committee, the highest state body of the

Russian Soviet Federated Socialist Republic, the largest Soviet state, from 1917 to 1937, when it was
succeeded by the Presidium of the Republic's Supreme Soviet. The national equivalent of VTsIK
was TsIK, the Central Executive Committee of the U.S.S.R. (1922-1938), which became the
Presidium of the national Supreme Soviet.

Workers Opposition. Bolshevik faction that sought greater trade -union control of industry and
greater democracy within Party; its activities were condemned at Tenth Party Congress in 1921, and
some leaders were later expelled from Party and arrested.

Zek. Prison slang for prisoner, derived from zaklyuchenny, Russian word for "prisoner."
Zemstvo. Local government unit in prerevolutionary Russia.
